1. Gulf of Tonkin UNAV 1964
Incident and resolution: US free Air Strikes, then moves 6 US pieces
from out-of-play to any Cities.
Congressional regrets: Aid –1 per Casualty. All Casualties out of
play.
Tips. The free Air Strike otherwise follows the usual rule (4.2.3), so
it can be in any spaces with US/ARVN pieces, it shifts Support/Opposition,
and it can Degrade the Trail. “Pieces” include Bases (1.4).
Background. On August 2, 1964 the USS Maddox was engaged
by elements of North Vietnam’s 135th Torpedo squadron. Two
days later a second incident was reported, but based on declassified
reports there was likely no actual engagement. These two reported
encounters between North Vietnam and the USN were the basis for
the Gulf of Tonkin resolution that gave the Johnson administration
legal justification for military operations in Vietnam.
2. Kissinger UNAV 1968
Operation Menu: Remove a die roll of Insurgent pieces total from
Cambodia and Laos.
“Secret bombing” revealed: NVA places 2 pieces in Cambodia. US
moves any 2 US Troops to out of play. Aid –6.
Tip. “Pieces” include unTunneled Bases (1.4, 5.1.1). “Any Troops”
here can include Casualties, Available, or from the map.
Background. Henry Kissinger was National Security Advisor
throughout the Nixon administration. He was and remains a brilliant
strategist who helped create the conditions that allowed the US to
withdraw from Vietnam. The Nixon administration’s expansion of
the war into Cambodia and Laos to cut the Trail included controversial
incursions against and bombing of NVA redoubts in Cambodia.
They also led to the disastrous Lam Son 719 offensive (Event 74).
3. Peace Talks UNAV 1968
Haiphong mined: NVA Resources –9. Linebacker II allowed when
Support+Available >25 (mark).
Bombing halt: NVA Resources +9. If Trail 0-2, Improve to 3.
Tip. For the unshaded effect, place the “Peace Talks” marker on the
“Linebacker II” US Pivotal Event card as a reminder of its loosened
precondition.
Background. The Nixon administration used a series of carrots
(bombing halts) and sticks (mining/bombing) to bring Hanoi to the
negotiating table. It would appear that the mining of Haiphong – a
component of the Linebacker II bombing campaign (Pivotal Event
121) – accelerated the peace talks.


4. Top Gun UNAV 1968
US CAPABILITY
Air combat maneuver: Cancel shaded MiGs. Air Strikes Degrade
Trail 2 boxes.
Mediocre tactics: Air Strike Degrades Trail only on die roll of 4-6.
Tips. The unshaded “Top Gun” Capability can either block shaded
“MiGs” from being executed or remove it once it has been executed.
The shaded means that US each Air Strike first announces whether
attempting Degrade of Trail, then rolls a die to determine effect.
Background. Analysis of air combat over Vietnam proved that the
US had lost its tactical edge to the enemy’s MiGs (Event 33). This
was due to a misguided overreliance on radar air-to-air missile
technology. The US Navy’s Top Gun program began the process
of developing and retraining US airmen in dogfighting tactics that
turned the situation around.
5. Wild Weasels UNAV 1965
Air defense suppression: Remove shaded SA-2s or, if no shaded
SA-2s, Degrade Trail 2 boxes and NVA Resources –9.
Complex strike packages: Until Coup, Air Strike only Degrades
Trail if no spaces selected.
MOMENTUM
Tips. Unshaded “Wild Weasels” can remove shaded “SA-2s” only at
the moment that “Wild Weasels” is executed. Shaded effect means
that US has to choose with each Air Strike Special Activity whether
to remove enemy pieces or Degrade the Trail, not both.
Background. Wild Weasels were the nickname given to any aircraft
assigned to the electronic countermeasures (ECM) mission.
ECM missions targeted enemy radars and surface-to-air missile
installations.
6. Aces UNVA 1965
Robin Olds ambushes MiGs: Free Air Strike any 1 space outside the
South, degrading Trail 2 boxes.
MiG ace “Colonel Tomb”: 2 Available US Troops to Casualties.
Improve Trail by 2 boxes.
Tips. “Any 1 space outside the South” means any 1 North Vietnam,
Laos, or Cambodia Province, even if no US or ARVN piece there.
Degrade of the Trail is 2 boxes total, instead of the usual.
Background. This card pays homage to the many airmen who
fought in the skies over Vietnam. Robin Olds is an iconic American
fighter ace who fought in WWII and Vietnam. Colonel Tombs on
the other hand is probably not a real person, but a propaganda icon.
He is representative of North Vietnam’s better-trained pilots who
in many cases were foreign “volunteers”.
7. ADSID UNVA 1965
Air-delivered seismic intrusion detector: Through Coup, –6 NVA
Resources at any Trail# change.
MOMENTUM
Dubious technology: Improve Trail by 1 box and to a minimum of
2. ARVN Resources –9.
Tip. The unshaded text drops NVA Resources upon both Improving
and Degrading the Trail via any means (player action, Event, or
Coup Round Sequence).
Background. ADSIDs represent the beginning of the electronic
sensor revolution that was in its infancy during the conflict. The idea
was to create an electronic grid that would queue US airpower to
attack convoys as they moved along the Ho Chi Minh Trail. While
this strategy had some successes this technology suffered from low
reliability and spoofing by the NVA.
8. Arc Light UNVA 1965
US CAPABILITY
Guided B-52 tactical bombing: 1 space each Air Strike may be a
Province without COIN pieces.
Moonscape: Air Strike spaces removing >1 piece shift 2 levels
toward Active Opposition.
Tip. “Provinces” include spaces in North Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia
(1.3.5). A Base is a “piece” (1.4).
Background. Arc Light was the term for the use of US strategic
bombers (B-52s) in an interdiction and ground support role. Arc
Lights were much feared by the NVA and VC, as the strike would
often occur without any warning due to the high altitude of the bomb
release. Even today when you look at topographic maps of Vietnam
the distinct pattern of these strikes can sometimes still be discerned.
9. Psychedelic Cookie UNVA 1968
9th Division: US moves up to 3 US Troops from out of play to
Available or South Vietnam, or from the map to Available.
Worn out formation: US takes 3 of its Troops from the map out of play.
Tip. Adjust “Support+Available” score marker when US Troops or
Bases move in or out of Available (7.2).
Background. The 9th Infantry Division’s Vietnam-era nickname
was the “Psychedelic Cookie” for its colorful blue-and-red circular
patch – a far cry from its WWII name of the “Old Reliables”. It
operated in the Mekong Delta in close coordination with Task Force
116 (Event 25) and the ARVN 7th Division.
10. Rolling Thunder UNVA 1965
Sustained bombing: Degrade Trail 2 boxes. –9 NVA Resources.
NVA Ineligible through next card.
Assets to restricted strategic air campaign: –5 ARVN Resources.
No Air Strike until Coup.
MOMENTUM
Tip. The drop in ARVN Resources is instant and once; the ban on
Air Strikes lasts until the next Coup Round (5.4).
Background. This was the code name for the US bombing campaign
against North Vietnam’s infrastructure and supply routes. The
purpose of the campaign was to convince the North to negotiate. Its
premise was that the bombing missions would escalate with periodic
pauses based on the perception of Hanoi’s responses. It began
in March of 1965 and ran until November of 1968, having failed
not only to force negotiations but to reverse the growing Northern
infiltration of the South.
11. Abrams UANV 1968
US CAPABILITY
Counter-logistics: 1 US Assault space may remove 1 enemy
non‑Tunnel Base first not last.
No more big-unit war: US may select max 2 spaces per Assault.
Tip. The unshaded text changes US Assault only by removing the
“Bases last” restriction for 1 Base in 1 space – the total number of
pieces to be removed and other restrictions (3.2.4) remain the same.


Background. Creighton Abrams was the third commander of
MACV. He was known for his innovative tactics and charted a
very different course for the US Army in Vietnam. Abrams was the
commander over the last portion of the period covered in the game.
he was instrumental in implementing Nixon’s Vietnamization program
(Pivotal Event 123) and pursued a counter-logistical strategy
credited with choking off indigenously-based VC strength by the
time of US military withdrawal.
12. Capt Buck Adams UANV 1968
Strategic reconnaissance: Outside the South, flip all Insurgents
Active and remove 1 NVA Base.
SR-71 pilot must outrun SA-2s: Place 1 NVA Base at NVA Control
outside the South and flip any 3 NVA Guerrillas Underground.
Tip. “At NVA Control outside the South” means place 1 available
NVA Base into any North Vietnam, Laos, or Cambodia Province
that already has NVA Control and where there are not already 2
Bases (1.3.5, 1.4.2, 5.1.1).
Background. The SR-71 Blackbird was a revolutionary aircraft
design on the bleeding edge of technology. Blackbirds supplied
strategic reconnaissance of North Vietnam during the last third of the
war. While the Blackbird is renowned for its ability to fly above and
outrun any enemy defenses, on occasion SR-71s were engaged by
the North’s high-altitude SA-2s (Event 34). On one such occasion,
USAF Captain Buck Adams (now General, retired) had finished his
first pass over the country and on his second pass was engaged by
two SA-2 missiles that he successfully outran.
13. Cobras UANV 1968
US CAPABILITY
Gunships: 2 US/ARVN Sweep spaces each remove 1 Active unTunneled
enemy (Troops first, Bases last).
Close air support losses: Each US Assault space, 1 US Troop to
Casualties on a die roll of 1-3.
Tip. An added ARVN Assault in a US Assault space would have no
added effect on US Casualties.
Background. The AH-1 Cobra was based on close air support requirements
for a helicopter gunship to replace the modified UH-1
Huey’s serving in that role. It featured a tandem pilot-gunner arrangement
to give it a narrow silhouette and was armed with a cannon,
rockets, and later in the war TOW anti-tank missiles.
14. M-48 Patton UANV 1965
US CAPABILITY
Armored Punch: 2 non-Lowland US Assault spaces each remove
2 extra enemy pieces.
RPGs: After US/ARVN Patrol, NVA on a die roll of 1-3 removes
1 cube that moved (US to Casualties).
Tip. The unshaded text changes US Assault only by adding to the
number of pieces to be removed from some spaces – restrictions
on which pieces may be removed (3.2.4) remain the same. “US to
Casualties” means that any US pieces removed go to the Casualties
box, while ARVN pieces removed go to ARVN Available Forces as
usual (1.4.1).
Background. In the early 1960s, the M-48 Patton was the US Army’s
Main Battle Tank, followed in the early ‘70s by the M-60. Armor
operations in Vietnam were always terrain challenged, but in the
right tactical environment were very effective.
15. Medevac UANV 1964
Dustoff: This Commitment, all Troop Casualties Available (mark).
MOMENTUM
Hueys diverted: Executing Faction remains Eligible. Until Coup,
no Air Lift (mark).
MOMENTUM
Tip. Place the “Medevac” marker on the corresponding side onto the
set-aside Momentum card as a reminder of which text was executed.
For unshaded, upon the coming Commitment Phase, immediately
move all US Troops that are in the Casualties box to Available;
no Troops go out of play; Base Casualties still do. The Casualties
will already have reduced Aid in the preceding Resources Phase
(6.2.5, 6.5). If unshaded Event 73 “Great Society” occurs while
unshaded “Medevac” is in effect, “Medevac” affects the immediate
Commitment Phase and then stays in effect to affect the coming
Coup Round’s Commitment Phase as well. Note also that unshaded
“Medevac” played during the final campaign would have no effect
unless unshaded “Great Society” subsequently occurs, because
there otherwise will be no further Commitment Phase (6.4.5, 6.5).
Background. With its origins during the Burma campaign in WWII,
the US Medevac capability enabled the timely evacuation of casualties
from combat directly to modern medical treatment.
16. Blowtorch Komer UAVN 1968
Pacification czar: Aid +10. This Support phase, Pacify costs 1
Resource per step or Terror.
MOMENTUM
Brusque manager: Aid –10. Shift a space with Troops and Police 1
level toward Active Opposition.
Tip. Addition of Aid is instant; the reduced cost to Pacify applies
in the next Coup Round only (5.4).
Background. Robert Komer had a direct management style that
endeared him to LBJ but led to his nickname of Blowtorch Bob.
He was the head of the CORDS component of MACV (Event 19)
and its controversial Phoenix program (Event 27).
17. Claymores UAVN 1964
Perimeter: Stay Eligible. Until
Coup, no Ambush; remove 1
Guerrilla each Marching group
that Activates.
MOMENTUM
Infiltrators turn mines around:
Remove 1 COIN Base and
1 Underground Insurgent from
a space with both (US to Casualties).
Tip. Eligibility for the executing
Faction applies instantly
and once; the effects on Ambush
and March last until the
next Coup Round (5.4).
Background. The U.S. M18 Claymore directional mine was an iconic
and effective anti-personnel device used during most of the Vietnam
war. The Claymore throws steel balls out to about 100 meters intended
to disable or kill enemy infantry. The movie Platoon has a night engagement
scene that shows the employment and use of this weapon.


18. Combined Action Platoons UAVN 1965
US CAPABILITY
Hamlet defense: US Training places or relocates an added Police
into any 1 space with US Troops.
Passive posture: US may select max 2 spaces per Sweep.
Tip. For the unshaded Capability, just 1 Police places or relocates per
Training Operation, regardless of how many spaces the US Trains in.
Background. The CAP program was a Marine Corps initiative that
married up a Marine rifle squad with a local defense unit to protect
hamlets from VC infiltration and coercion. They were viewed as
one of the best counterinsurgency responses developed by the US
during the war.
19. CORDS UAVN 1968
US CAPABILITY
Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development Support: US
Training may Pacify in 2 selected spaces.
Civilian programs subordinated to military: US Training may Pacify
only to Passive Support.
Tip. Pacification costs per Terror marker or level remain the same.
Background. Civil Operations and Revolutionary Development
Support was a civilian-run component under MACV, formed in 1967
and run by Bob Komer (Event 16) then Bill Colby. It consolidated an
array of programs to meet rural economic and security needs of the
peasants, squeeze the VC infrastructure, dry up VC recruiting, and
thereby pacify the countryside. The controversial Phoenix program
(Event 27) was among its many elements.
20. Laser Guided Bombs UAVN 1968
US CAPABILITY
Dawn of precision strike: Air Strike does not shift Support/Opposition
in spaces where only 1 piece removed.
Camouflage: Air Strike removes no more than 4 pieces.
Tip. A Base is a “piece” (1.4).
Background. The skies over Vietnam saw the dawn of precision
guided warfare. The destruction of the famous and hard-to-hit Thanh
Hoa Bridge (Event 35) was the first prominently noted success for
this new ordnance.
21. Americal UVNA 1968
23rd Division: US moves up to 2 US Troops each from the map and
out of play to any 1 space or Available.
US divisions “clean out” NLF: In 1 or 2 Provinces with US Troops,
remove 1 VC piece to set to Active Opposition.
Tips. For the shaded Event, the VC “piece” could be a Guerrilla or
an unTunneled Base (1.4, 5.1.1). If there are Provinces that have US
Troops, VC, and could be set (changed) to Active Opposition, such
Provinces would have to be chosen first. Note that COIN Factions
might advantageously use the shaded text (5.2)!
Background. The Americal Division was created in 1942 in New
Caledonia in order to amalgamate several regiments shed by reserve
divisions in a reorganization. In Vietnam, the Americal (23rd Infantry
Division) was reactivated by joining a brigade of the 25th and
101st Divisions plus the independent 196th Brigade. Americal in
1969 participated with several other divisions in General Abrams’
counter-logistical sweeps (Event 11) as part of the Accelerated
Pacification Campaign (Event 96) that up-ended NLF control of
several regions but also defoliated and destroyed crops, forcing the
peasants there to leave the land.
22. Da Nang UVNA 1965
US Marines arrive: US places up to 6 Troops in Da Nang, up to 3
from out of play.
VC fire closes air base: Remove all Support within 1 space of Da
Nang. No Air Strike until Coup.
MOMENTUM
Tip. Removal of Support is instant and once; the ban on Air Strikes
lasts until the next Coup Round (5.4).
Background. Da Nang was used as a US support base starting in
1957 and eventually grew to rival Tan San Nhut airbase in importance.
Its position within 85 miles of the DMZ made it an ideal
location from which to launch strikes into I Corps and into the
North. The US Marine Corps landed in Da Nang in 1965 initially to
guard the airbase, but it later became one of the US major combat
operations hubs.
23. Operation Attleboro UVNA 1965
Stab at Iron Triangle: US free Air Lifts into, Sweeps in, then Assaults
a space with a Tunnel—removing Tunneled Bases as if no Tunnel.
Heavy casualties, few results: Select a Tunnel space—remove a die
roll of US Troops within 1 space of it to Casualties.
Tip. This is one of just a few Events that can force removal of Tunneled
Bases (5.1.1). The Sweep could occur even during Monsoon.
Free US Assault can add an ARVN Assault at cost 0 (3.2.4).
Background. Operation Attleboro was a Search and Destroy operation
that ran from September through November of 1966. The
first phase saw the 196th Brigade with elements of the 1st Infantry
Division engage the 9th VC Division in a major battle in the Iron
Triangle. Eventually the operation overran a VC base camp with the
capture and destruction of a large cache of supplies, but the province
remained under VC control.
24. Operation Starlite UVNA 1965
VC caught off guard: Remove all VC from a coastal Province with
or adjacent to US Troops.
Slipped away: In up to 3 Provinces, flip all VC Guerrillas Underground.
Stay Eligible.
Tip. “Coastal” Provinces are those touching or across a Highway
from ocean (1.3.7). For the shaded text, the Faction executing the
Event stays Eligible.
Background. Operation Starlite (August 18, 1965) was the first
USMC combat operation of the Vietnam War. The Marines engaged
the 1st VC Regiment in the ARVN I Corps area in a tactical victory,
but an operational defeat, as the VC unit successfully disengaged.
25. TF-116 Riverines UVNA 1965
Delta boats: Remove all NVA/VC from Mekong LoCs. US or ARVN
free Sweep into/in then free Assault each Lowland touching Mekong.
VC river fortifications: Place 2 VC Guerrillas per Mekong LoC
space, then Sabotage each that has more VC than COIN.
Tips. Whichever Faction executed the unshaded text would choose
either US or ARVN to Sweep and Assault, and that Sweeping/Assaulting
Faction would choose how (5.1). The Sweep could occur
even during Monsoon. Free US Assault can add an ARVN Assault 


at cost 0 (3.2.4). “Mekong” means any of the 3 river LoC spaces
touching Can Tho. “COIN” means either US or ARVN pieces.
Background. The US Navy operated a large group of riverine craft
in the Mekong Delta under the command of Task Force 116. The
concept was to join an Infantry Brigade (2nd Brigade of the 9th
Division) with “brown water” naval craft to interdict and engage
enemy forces in the waterways of the Delta. One of its more famous
operations was Game Warden in December of 1965.
26. LRRP UVAN 1964
Long Range Recon Patrol: US places 3 Irregulars outside the South
then free Air Strikes, removing Bases first.
Patrols ambushed: 3 Irregulars map to Casualties. Shift each space
they were in 1 level toward Active Opposition.
Tips. “Irregulars” are US Special Forces pieces, not ARVN Rangers.
“Outside the South” means any Laos or Cambodia Provinces.
The free Air Strike otherwise follows the usual rule (4.2.3) so can
be in any spaces with US/ARVN pieces (not only in those that just
received Irregulars or outside the South), shifts Support/Opposition,
and can Degrade the Trail.
Background. Veteran or specially trained forces often augmented
with Vietnamese irregulars usually carried out Long Range Reconnaissance
Patrols into enemy territory. The Studies and Observation
Group or SOG was the ground element of the US air war against
the Ho Chi Minh Trail as illustrated by Project Tiger that spotted for
and marked enemy trail activity for prosecution by US air assets.
27. Phoenix Program UVAN 1968
Cadres assassinated: Remove any 3 VC pieces total from any COIN
Control spaces.
Misdirected: Add a Terror marker to any 2 spaces outside Saigon
with COIN Control and VC. Set them to Active Opposition.
Tip. “Pieces” include unTunneled Bases (1.4, 5.1.1).
Background. The Phoenix Program used targeted assassination of
VC leadership and support in the rural countryside. The Communists
credited Phoenix with substantial destruction of their infrastructure.
One of the weaknesses of the program from the counterinsurgent
perspective, however, was that local vendettas often resulted in
innocent civilians being identified as insurgents. CORDS Director
Colby estimated that it accounted for over 20,000 casualties, some
of ambiguous guilt.
28. Search and Destroy UVAN 1965
US CAPABILITY
Mobile counter-guerrilla ops: Each US Assault space may remove
1 Underground Guerrilla.
Villagers in the crossfire: Each US and ARVN Assault Province
shifts by 1 level toward Active Opposition.
Tips. The unshaded effect changes US Assault only by allowing
inclusion of 1 Underground Guerrilla per space among the pieces
to be removed (3.2.4) – it therefore adds to the total removed only
if that number would otherwise be 0. The shaded effect applies to
Provinces only, not Cities, and to US-only, ARVN-only, and US
plus ARVN Assaults.
Background. This term characterized a class of counterinsurgency
operations. The concept was to have a series of small forces find and
fix enemy guerrilla forces then use reinforcements, artillery, and air
strikes to eliminate the enemy formation. The impact of this doctrine
was mixed as it often created more guerrillas than it eliminated.
29. Tribesmen UVAN 1964
Minority fighters: Remove any 4 Insurgent pieces total from spaces
with Irregulars.
Tribal secession: Replace all Irregulars with VC Guerrillas. 1 Neutral
Highland to Active Opposition. -3 Patronage.
Tips. “Pieces” include unTunneled Bases (1.4, 5.1.1). “Insurgent”
means NVA or VC. “Irregulars” are US Special Forces pieces, not
ARVN Rangers. Replace Irregulars that are on the map (only), with
Guerrillas 1 for 1 in place (Irregulars to Available). “1 Highland”
means 1 Highland space.
Background. Vietnam is a polyglot of minorities to include several
such as the Montagnards who still operated an ancient hunter-gatherer
economy. These tribesmen were often at odds with their urban
countrymen but fought as irregulars for both sides.
30. USS New Jersey UVAN 1968
Fire support: US or ARVN free Air Strikes any 1-3 coastal spaces,
removing up to 6 pieces per space (no effect on Trail).
Frightening free fire: Shift 2 coastal Provinces with US Troops each
2 levels toward Active Opposition.
Tips. “Coastal” means Provinces, Cities, and LoCs touching ocean,
including North Vietnam, as well as Provinces across a Highway
from ocean (1.3.7). For the unshaded text, “any 1-3 spaces” means
that the spaces do not need to have US or ARVN pieces in them. The
executing Faction chooses US or ARVN to strike, and that Faction
decides the details; it must strike at least 1 space. The Air Strikes
have all other usual restrictions and effects in the spaces, including
removing Active pieces only and Bases last, and shifting Support/
Opposition (4.2.3).
Background. Motivated by high aircraft losses, Secretary McNamara
authorized the re-commissioning of BB-62, the USS New
Jersey, to augment the air war along the extensive Vietnam coastline.
Destroyers first bombarded VC targets in central South Vietnam in
May 1965, and New Jersey later joined them as part of Task Group
70.8, climaxing with some 22 ships on the gun line during the 1968
Tet Offensive (Pivotal Event 124).
31. AAA NUAV 1964
NVA CAPABILITY
Assets to protection from close air attack: Rally that Improves Trail
may select 1 space only.
Point air defense of logistic hubs: Air Strike does not Degrade Trail
below 2.
Tip. For the unshaded Capability, the NVA may still Rally in more
than 1 space, but, if they do so, then that Rally Operation may not
also Improve the Trail.
Background. The Gulf of Tonkin incident (Event 1) spurred Chinese
and Soviet aid to North Vietnam with various forms of military
hardware. One of the key AAA (anti-aircraft artillery) assets was
the 57mm AZP S-60 with a range of 1,500 meters. While highly
inaccurate, when fired in volume against fighter aircraft making
low-level bombing runs or against low-flying helicopters, its heavy
caliber round was very lethal.


32. Long Range Guns NUAV 1968
NVA CAPABILITY
US M-107 175mm counterbattery: NVA Bombard max 1 space.
Soviet M-46 130mm artillery: NVA Bombard max 3 spaces.
Tip. Other restrictions on Bombard apply normally (4.4.2).
Background. As the war progressed, the NVA regulars were supplied
with an array of state-of-the-art artillery by their allies (Event 49).
The Soviet M-46 was originally designed as a rifled naval gun and
could out-range any US artillery then in theater. In response, the US
deployed the M-175 to regain artillery range parity.
33. MiGs NUAV 1968
NVA CAPABILITY
Expensive interceptors: NVA Resources –6 each Reset.
High US loss ratio: Unless unshaded Top Gun, whenever Air Strike
Degrades Trail, US removes 1 Available Troop to Casualties.
Tip. The unshaded “Top Gun” Capability can either block shaded
“MiGs” from being executed or remove it once it has been executed.
Background. China and the USSR supplied North Vietnam with
limited numbers of jet aircraft such as the MiG-15, MiG-17, MiG-19,
and MiG-21, sufficiently advanced to challenge US jets in dogfights
over the North. It is currently believed that “foreign volunteers” flew
some of these MiGs.
34. SA-2s NUAV 1965
NVA CAPABILITY
Fiddly Soviet gear: When Air Strike Degrades Trail, US removes
1 NVA piece outside the South.
SAMs guard infrastructure: NVA Rally Improves Trail 2 boxes not
1 (unshaded Wild Weasels remove).
Tips. “Piece” may include an unTunneled Base (1.4, 5.1.1). “Outside
the South” includes North Vietnam (1.3.5). Unshaded “Wild
Weasels” (Event card #5) can remove shaded “SA-2s” only at the
moment that “Wild Weasels” is executed.
Background. The Soviet S-75 Dvina (NATO codename SA-2
Guideline) is a high-altitude surface-to-air missile that burst onto the
world stage when it successfully shot down a U-2 reconnaissance
plane piloted by Gary Powers. During the Vietnam War, the SA-2
was deployed mostly to defend the key Hanoi-Haiphong region.
35. Thanh Hoa NUAV 1968
Bridge busters: US free Air Strikes, degrading Trail by 3 boxes.
NVA Resources –6.
Stubborn targets: Improve Trail by 1 box. Then add three times Trail
value to NVA Resources.
Tip. The Air Strike Degrades the Trail 3 boxes instead of the usual
amount (“4” would go to “1”).
Background. The Thanh Hoa Bridge spanned the Song Ma river
and was the northern gateway to the Ho Chi Minh trail. As a consequence,
it was always a high priority US target. It received 873 air
sorties and had extensive air defenses that accounted for the loss of
104 aircraft shot down in its vicinity. It was finally destroyed beyond
repair in 1972 with early-generation laser-guided bombs (Event 20)
and taken off the target list.
36. Hamburger Hill NUVA 1968
A Shau Valley campaign: Move 4 US Troops from any spaces to
a Highland. Remove 1 NVA or VC Base there, even if Tunneled.
Prepared defenses: Place a Tunnel on an NVA or VC Highland Base.
3 US Troops there to Casualties.
Tips. “A Highland” means 1 Highland space. “Highland Base”
means a Base in a Highland space. This is one of just a few Events
that can force removal of Tunneled Bases (5.1.1).
Background. Hill 937 (Ap Bia Mountain) on the Laotian border
was taken in a bloody assault by the 101st Infantry division in May
1969. The high casualties incurred for a piece of terrain that was soon
abandoned and thus appeared of little value caused a public backlash.
37. Khe Sanh NUVA 1968
Northern casualties: Select a US Base with US Troops. Remove 10
NVA Troops within 1 space of it.
US Marines pinned: Up to 3 US Troops in 1 space with NVA to
Casualties. US Ineligible through next card.
Tip. The 10 total NVA Troops removed may come from more than
1 adjacent space, including the same space as the US pieces.
Background. The US base at Khe Sanh near the DMZ sat astride
Route 9, the northern most egress route of the Ho Chi Minh Trail.
From January 21st to early March 1968, the base was repeatedly
assaulted by NVA regulars, including one of the first uses of armor
by the North (see Event 45). LBJ fixated upon the siege, seeing it
as a potential Dien Bien Phu. More recent analysis views the attack
as a diversion in support of the Tet Offensive assaults on South
Vietnam’s urban centers.
38. McNamara Line NUVA 1965
Fortification mentality: Redeploy all COIN forces outside Vietnam
to COIN-Controlled Cities. ARVN Resources –12. No Infiltrate or
Trail Improvement by Rally until Coup.
MOMENTUM
Tips. “Outside Vietnam” means Laos and Cambodia Provinces. The
executing Faction gets to choose which redeploying pieces go to
which COIN-Controlled Cities (5.1). Redeploy and Resource drop
occur instantly and once; the effects on Infiltrate and Rally last until
the next Coup Round (5.4).
Background. This was a term associated with the US strategy to
deploy an electronic sensor fence supported by air power to isolate
the South from Northern infiltration. While it had some periodic
successes, overall the historical view is that it failed to accomplish
its major goal of interdicting the Trail.
39. Oriskany NUVA 1965
“Alpha” strikes on North Vietnam: Remove any 4 pieces from North
Vietnam or, once none, Laos. Degrade Trail 2 boxes.
Explosion on CV-34: 1 Available US Troop out of play. Through
next Coup, no Degrade of Trail.
MOMENTUM
Tips. “Pieces” include unTunneled Bases as well as Troops and
Guerrillas (1.4, 5.1.1). The US Troop goes out of play immediately;
the ban on Degrade of Trail lasts through the end of the next Coup
Round (so blocks effects of COIN Control in Laos/Cambodia and
would leave “4” at “4”, 6.2.2 & 6.6).
Background. The US Navy continually operated Carrier Task Forces
from Yankee Station whose mission was to provide air support to 


MACV and Rolling Thunder. Although the North did not have a
blue water navy to contest these operations, they were not without
incident. On October 26, 1966, a fire erupted on the USS Oriskany
that took the lives of 44 seamen and pilots.
40. PoWs NUVA 1968
Release negotiations keep US at war: Free Air Strike. 2 US Troops
from Casualties to Available.
Air campaign creates hostages: 3 US Troops from Available to
Casualties.
Tip. Whichever Faction executes the unshaded Event decides the
specifics of the Air Strike Special Activity (spaces targeted, whether
the Trail is Degraded, etc.).
Background. US pilots shot down over North Vietnam comprised
the majority of the US prisoners of war held by the North, although
all services had personnel held there. Pawns in the negotiations, it
took the signing of the Paris Peace Accords to release them from
captivity. To this day, not all missing US servicemen have been
accounted for.
41. Bombing Pause NAUV 1968
Tet holiday gesture: Set any 2 spaces to Passive Support. Patronage
+2. No Air Strike until Coup.
MOMENTUM
Tip. The Support and Patronage take effect at once; the ban on Air
Strikes lasts until the next Coup Round.
Background. Over the course of Rolling Thunder and Linebacker I
and II, the US employed a carrot and stick strategy. While the intent
of bombing pauses was to give the North the opportunity to alter
their aggression, they only served to allow the North to rebuild.
42. Chou En Lai NAUV 1968
Chinese opening to US: NVA Resources –10. NVA must remove a
die roll in Troops.
Chinese boost aid to North: NVA add +10 Resources. VC add Trail
value in Resources.
Tip. For the unshaded Event, the NVA get to choose which of their
Troops are removed from the map.
Background. Chou En Lai (or Zhou Enlai) was China’s able
statesmen and geopolitical strategist who oversaw most of China’s
participation in the Vietnam War. China supplied significant air defense
forces and supplies to Hanoi over the course of the war. It was
the specter of Chinese overt intervention in the war that prevented
the US from seriously considering an invasion of North Vietnam.
He also helped orchestrate Richard Nixon’s 1972 visit to China.
43. Economic Aid NAUV 1964
Free World aids Saigon: 2 ARVN or 2 US Bases out-of-play to
Available. Then ARVN Resources +6 or Aid +12.
Moscow aids Hanoi: Improve the Trail 1 box. Then either Improve
it 1 more box or add +10 NVA Resources.
Tip. Choose either 2 ARVN or 2 US Bases, not 1 ARVN Base and
1 US Base.
Background. The Vietnam War was a Civil War that occurred within
the context of the Cold War. The Vietnam antagonists were fueled
and supported by economic assistance from the various international
actors in the war, primarily the US, China, and the Soviet Union.
44. Ia Drang NAUV 1965
Silver Bayonet: US free Air Lifts into 1 space with any NVA piece,
then free Sweeps and Assaults there.
Dong Xuan campaign—hot LZs: Select a Province with NVA
Troops—remove a die roll of US Troops within 1 space of it to
Casualties.
Tips. For the unshaded Event, the US decides the details of the free
actions but must Air Lift, Sweep, and Assault with something. The
Sweep could occur even during Monsoon. The free US Assault can
add an ARVN Assault at cost 0 (3.2.4). For shaded, the US Troops
can be any either in the same space as or adjacent to the Province
with NVA Troops.
Background. In mid-November 1965, a 7th Cavalry operation
became the first major test of the new US helicopter doctrine. The
battle saw the 1st Cavalry Division engage several formations of
NVA regulars in the Central Highlands. This battle was immortalized
in the book and the film “We Were Soldiers Once… and Young”.
45. PT-76 NAUV 1968
NVA CAPABILITY
Light armor target: Each NVA Attack space, first remove 1 NVA
Troop cube.
Communist armored assault: NVA Attack in 1 space removes 1
enemy per Troop.
Tips. The Capability will have no effect on NVA Attacks with
Guerrillas where no NVA Troops. The unshaded version will remove
an NVA Troop even when NVA Guerrillas Attack or Ambush in a
space with an NVA Troop.
Background. The Soviet PT-76 is an amphibious-capable light tank
supplied to North Vietnam during the war. One of its first combat
uses was against Khe Sanh in 1968 (Event 45).
46. 559th Transport Grp NAVU 1965
Tough terrain: Degrade the Trail by 2 boxes. Until Coup, Infiltrate
is max 1 space.
MOMENTUM
The way through: NVA free Infiltrate. Then NVA add 3 times and
VC 2 times Trail value in Resources.
Tip. The Trail Degrades at once; the limit on Infiltrate lasts until
the next Coup Round
Background. The 559th Transport Group was a combined transportation
and security organization that reported directly to the Central
Committee in Hanoi. The Group’s main function was to operate,
expand, and secure the infiltration routes that became known as the
Ho Chi Minh Trail. It divided its area of operations (Laos and NE
Cambodia) into subordinate units called binh trams. Each of these
consisted of way stations responsible for the care and feeding of
troops, road expansion and repair, plus local security. In 1967, the
559th Group commanded 11 binh trams employing 7,000 porters.
In the mid-1960s, a sister organization, the 470th Transport Group,
took over responsibility for Cambodia.
47. Chu Luc NAVU 1965
Southerners resist invasion: Add ARVN Troops to double the ARVN
pieces in a space with NVA. All ARVN free Assault NVA.
NVA professional soldiers: Place up to 10 NVA Troops anywhere
within 1 space of North Vietnam.
Tips. For the unshaded Event, in the selected space, count the number 


of ARVN pieces (including Bases) and place that number of ARVN
Troops there from Available. Then ARVN Troops and Police Assault
to remove NVA (only) in each map space with both ARVN and Active
NVA. For the shaded Event, place the Troops anywhere among
North Vietnam, Central Laos, Quang Tri, and the LoC from Khe
Sanh to Hue (Highway 9)—even where Support or COIN Control.
Background. From the time of the Viet Minh fighting the French,
Chu Luc was the Vietnamese term for the full-time, professional
soldiers of the National Liberation Front (NVA and VC).
48. Nam Dong NAVU 1964
CIDG camp holds out: Remove up to 3 Guerrillas from a Province
with a COIN Base. Set the space to Active Support.
Camp overrun: Remove a COIN Base from a Province with 0-2
COIN cubes (US to Casualties) and set it to Active Opposition.
Tip. “COIN” means US or ARVN. “US to Casualties” means that
any US pieces removed go to the Casualties box, while ARVN piece
removed go to ARVN Available Forces as usual (1.4.1).
Background. On July 5, 1964 the Nam Dong CIDG camp was
attacked by NVA and VC forces. The base is 32 miles west of Da
Nang. The 5 hour battle resulted in the camp holding and Captain R.
C. Donlon receiving the first Medal of Honor awarded during the war.
49. Russian Arms NAVU 1968
Soviet escalation matched: Place any 6 ARVN pieces anywhere in
South Vietnam.
Heavy divisions, big guns: NVA in any 3 spaces places enough
Troops to double their number. It then free Bombards.
Tips. “Pieces” include Bases. For the unshaded Event, the executing
Faction would decide the pieces and locations. For the shaded, NVA
decides; in each selected space, place the same number of NVA
Troops as are already there, then execute a Bombard Special Activity.
The Bombard need not involve any of the Troops just placed.
Background. Depending on the political environment, Moscow
supplied Hanoi with substantial shipments of armaments via China
or Haiphong. The US mining of Haiphong in 1972 (Event 3)
short-circuited this support.
50. Uncle Ho NAVU 1964
Known communist: 4 out-of-play US Troops to South Vietnam, or
ARVN Resources +9. ARVN executes any 2 free Limited Operations.
Revolutionary unifier: VC then NVA each execute any 3 free Limited
Operations.
Tips. The Faction executing the unshaded Event decides where the
US Troops go. The Limited Operations can be the same or different,
in any including the same spaces, and may be selected as they occur,
so that results of previous choices may be taken into account.
Background. Born May 19, 1890 as Nguyen Sinh Con, he died in
1969 as Ho Chi Minh, North Vietnam’s President. He led a lifetime
of resistance to foreign rule of Vietnam first as Nguyen That Tranh
and later by the name he immortalized. He was ever the soul of
Vietnamese resistance, and it was his vision that eventually prevailed
in the conflict.
51. 301st Supply Bn NVUA 1964
Combat units diverted to logistics: Remove 6 non-Base Insurgent
pieces from outside South Vietnam.
Trail construction unit: Improve Trail by 2 boxes and add a die roll
of NVA Resources.
Tip. “Non-Base Insurgent pieces” include NVA Troops and NVA
and VC Guerrillas.
Background. The 301st Supply battalion was the first unit commissioned
to infiltrate supplies into South Vietnam. The organization
eventually grew to become the 559th Transportation Group.
52. RAND NVUA 1968
Whiz-kid corporation: Flip 1 shaded US Capability to unshaded.
Systems analysis in ignorance of local conditions: Flip 1 unshaded
US Capability to shaded.
Tip. A player may execute either version (5.2), so ARVN may flip
a US unshaded Capability to shaded.
Background. The RAND Corporation is a federally funded research
and development organization that had helped develop and articulate
US nuclear doctrine. During the Vietnam War, RAND applied its
analytic methods to understanding and recommending new strategies
for winning the war. Daniel Ellsberg, a former RAND employee,
leaked the “Pentagon Papers” to the press in 1971.
53. Sappers NVUA 1965
Ineffective tactics: Remove 2 NVA Troops each from up to 3 spaces
in South Vietnam. Remain Eligible.
Facilities damaged: Remove up to 1 US and 2 ARVN Bases from
any Provinces (US to Casualties).
Tip. Removal of pieces may change Control (1.7). The Bases may
not be removed from Cities. “US to Casualties” means that any
US Base removed goes to the Casualties box, while ARVN Bases
removed go to ARVN Available Forces as usual (1.4.1).
Background. Sappers were highly trained and motivated assault
troops used to infiltrate and penetrate Counterinsurgent positions.
54. Son Tay NVUA 1968
Daring rescue: 2 Troop Casualties to Available. NVA Ineligible
through next card. US Eligible.
No prisoners there: Any 2 Casualties out of play. US Ineligible
through next card
Tip. For the unshaded text, place the US Eligibility Cylinder from
wherever it is into the “Eligible Factions” box. If US executed the
Event and ARVN 2nd Eligible, ARVN may execute Ops & Special
Activity as usual.
Background. The famous “Hanoi Hilton” was one of several locations
in North Vietnam where US PoWs were held captive. On the
night of November 21, 1970, US Special Forces launched a helicopter
assault on the PoW camp at Son Tay, just west of Hanoi. The
raid successfully took the camp, but unfortunately the approximately
61 prisoners there had been recently moved to another location.


55. Trucks NVUA 1964
Bottlenecks: Degrade Trail 2 boxes. NVA selects and removes 4 of
its pieces each from Laos and Cambodia.
Convoys: Add twice Trail value to each NVA and VC Resources.
NVAmoves its unTunneled Bases anywhere within Laos/Cambodia.
Tips. For the shaded Event, NVA may have to remove as many
as 8 pieces total—4 in Laos and 4 in Cambodia; “pieces” include
Bases. For shaded, NVA may pick up all its unTunneled Bases from
Laos and Cambodia spaces, then replace them into any Laos and
Cambodia spaces desired, within stacking (1.4.2).
Background. While much of the effort on the Ho Chi Minh trail
was conducted with human muscle and animal power, it was the introduction
of trucks that dramatically increased the trails throughput
by reducing military casualties due to fatigue and disease.
56. Vo Nguyen Giap NVAU 1965
Premature conventional buildup: In each of any 3 spaces, replace
any 2 Guerrillas with 1 NVA Troop.
Military strategist: NVA free Marches into up to 3 spaces then
executes any 1 free Op or Special Activity within each, if desired.
Tip. The 3 spaces must be 3 different spaces, not the same space
more than once. The NVA would March even during Monsoon.
Background. Vo Nguyen Giap was the military genius and architect
of the Viet Minh victory at Dien Bien Phu. He went on to lead the
Peoples Army of Vietnam (NVA and VC) to victory. He was responsible
for organizing and leading most of the major Communist
offensives conducted during the war. Giap was born in 1911 and
died in 2013 at the age of 102.
57. International Unrest NVAU 1968
Protests ignored: Any 2 US Casualties to Available.
US accused of neocolonialist war: 2 Available US Troops out of
play. NVA add a die roll of Resources.
Tip. “US Casualties” may include Troops, Bases, and Irregulars.
Background. The Vietnam conflict took place within the context of
the Cold War. As the US commitment in Vietnam dragged on and
its purpose became more ambiguous, protests against the conflict
grew, not only in the United States but internationally.
58. Pathet Lao NVAU 1968
Drive on Vientiane: NVA removes 6 of its pieces total from North
Vietnam and Laos.
Trail security: If no COIN cubes in Laos, Improve Trail 2 boxes. If
there are, US and ARVN Redeploy them to Vietnam.
Tips. “Pieces” can include Bases. “COIN” means US or ARVN.
ARVN Redeploys ARVN Troops to Cities without NVA Control,
any US or ARVN Bases in South Vietnam, or Saigon, and Police to
LoCs or COIN Control in South Vietnam (6.4.2). US Redeploys US
Troops to anywhere in South Vietnam (including LoCs, if desired).
Background. The Pathet Lao were a communist movement that
ultimately prevailed during the Laotian Civil War—making Laos
one of the dominos that seemed to validate the Domino Theory.
The existence of the Pathet Lao provided the NVA some military
and political cover for occupation of parts of Laos necessary for
the maintenance and defense of the Ho Chi Minh Trail from North
to South Vietnam.
59. Plei Mei NVAU 1965
CIDG interdict NVA: Remove any 3 NVA pieces from a space with
or adjacent to a COIN Base.
Tay Nguyen offensive: NVA free March from any spaces outside
South Vietnam, then free Attack or Ambush any 1 space.
Tips. “COIN” means US or ARVN. For the unshaded text, “a
space” means the pieces must be removed from 1 single space.
“Pieces” can include Bases. For shaded, the NVA can March
repeatedly from Laos/Cambodia spaces—at cost 0—If the Trail
is at 1 or more and would March even during Monsoon. Any Ambushes
must occur in where there is at least one NVA Guerrilla to
Activate (4.4.3), but need not be in March destinations nor involve
Guerrillas that Marched and could occur even if all NVA Guerrillas
there were already Active.
Background. The Plei Mei Special Forces base in the Central Highlands
was the objective of an NVA offensive in July 1965. This was
the precursor to the fighting that led to the 1st Cavalry Silver Bayonet
offensive in November 1965 (Event 44, “Ia Drang”).
60. War Photographer NVAU 1968
Pulitzer photo inspires: 3 out-of-play US pieces to Available.
Photos galvanize home front: NVA place 6 Troops outside South
Vietnam, add +6 Resources, and, if executing, stay Eligible.
Tip. For the unshaded Event, Troops and Bases in US Available both
affect the US Support + Available score (7.2). If NVA is the Faction
executing the shaded Event, it stays Eligible.
Background. Combat photojournalists have been romanticized
for their pursuit of truth in the crucible of war. Both sides lost
numerous such photojournalists during combat in Vietnam. For an
amazing look at the experience and product of North Vietnamese
war photographers, see National Geographic’s 2001 documentary,
“Vietnam’s Unseen War”.
61. Armored Cavalry AUNV 1968
ARVN CAPABILITY
Shock force: ARVN in 1 Transport destination after Ops may free
Assault.
Sedentary sinecures: Transport Rangers only.
Tips. The unshaded “after Ops” means that the ARVN Assault occurs
once all Transport and accompanying Operations are completed.
Shaded effect means that no ARVN Troops—only Rangers—can
move by Transport Special Activity the rest of the game.
Background. The US supplied the ARVN with an array of light
armored vehicles, giving them an enhanced offensive capability
when supported by US advisors and air power, especially when
under aggressive ARVN command.
62. Cambodian Civil War AUNV 1968
Lon Nol deposes Sihanouk: US free Air Lifts into and US or ARVN
free Sweeps within Cambodia. Remove 2 NVA/VC Bases from
Cambodia.
NVA invades Cambodia: NVA places a total of 12 NVA Troops and
Guerrillas in Cambodia.
Tips. For the unshaded effect, US would decide the details of the Air
Lift and whichever Faction was Sweeping would decide the Sweep’s
details, including whether to move among Cambodia spaces. The
Sweep could occur even during Monsoon. Tunneled Bases could
not be removed (1.4.4, 5.1.1).


Background. A pro-US military coup against Cambodian Prince
Sihanouk, who had been tolerating NVA supply activities in the
country (Event 75), in March 1970 installed general and politician
Lon Nol as President. The NVA countered with an offensive against
Cambodian forces, at times drawing in US and ARVN forces from
South Vietnam. Fueled by the Vietnam War and NVA supplies, the
Cambodian Communist Khmer Rouge eventually overthrew the
Phnom Penh government on April 17, 1975.
63. Fact Finding AUNV 1964
US sends study teams: 2 US pieces from out-of-play to South Vietnam,
or transfer a die roll from Patronage to ARVN Resources. Aid +6.
Duped: Remove Support from a COIN-Controlled City outside
Saigon. Patronage +4 or VC Resources +4.
Tip. “Remove Support” means set either Active or Passive Support
to Neutral (1.6.2). Note that either unshaded or shaded versions of
the Event may be useful to the ARVN Faction.
Background. Over the course of the Vietnam War, the US government
sent a series of senior military and government officials
to give the White House and Congress first-hand accounts on the
progress of the conflict.
64. Honolulu Conference AUNV 1965
Uneasy allies: Aid +10 or –10. Patronage +3 or -5. If US or ARVN
executing, that Faction Pacifies as if Support Phase. If Insurgent
executing, that Faction remains Eligible.
Tip. Either the US or the ARVN only—whichever is executing
the Event—Pacifies, not one after the other as during the Support
Phase (6.3.1).
Background. Over the course of the Vietnam War, there were a series
of conferences held between senior US government and Republic of
Vietnam and ARVN leadership regarding military and political strategy
plus the resources (US aid) to support the decisions. Honolulu,
Hawaii served as a convenient geographic half-way meeting point.
Meanwhile, across town, Volko attended kindergarten.
65. International Forces AUNV 1968
Free World allies: Place 4 out-of-play US pieces onto the map.
Withdrawal: US must remove a die roll in pieces from the map to
out of play.
Tip. “Pieces” can include Bases. For the shaded text, the US decides
which US pieces to remove.
Background. The Vietnam conflict became a cockpit of the Cold
War, with East and West blocs supplying forces and supplies. US
“Free World Allies” serving in Vietnam included Australian (Event
98), New Zealand, Philippine, South Korean (Event 70), Thai, and
other forces.
66. Ambassador Taylor AUVN 1964
Interventionist: Aid and ARVN Resources each +9. Up to 2 US
pieces from out-of-play to South Vietnam or, if desired, Patronage -3.
Saigon seen as US puppet: Remove Support from 3 spaces outside
Saigon. Patronage –3.
Tips. The unshaded “if desired” means that the executing Faction
may decline both the US pieces and the drop in Patronage. “Pieces”
includes Bases. The shaded “remove Support” means remove
any Active or Passive Support marker from the space, leaving it
Neutral (1.6.2).
Background. General Maxwell Taylor was a decorated veteran
who commanded the US 101st Airborne division during WWII. He
was General Ridgeway’s Chief of Staff during the Korean War and
President Kennedy appointed him the fifth Chairman of the Joint
Chiefs of Staff in 1962. After his second retirement from active
military service in 1964, Taylor became the US Ambassador to
South Vietnam through 1965.
67. Amphib Landing AUVN 1965
Sea power: US or ARVN relocates any of its Troops among coastal
spaces, then free Sweeps and Assaults in 1 coastal space.
Enemy vanished: VC relocate up to 3 pieces from any coastal space.
US and ARVN Ineligible through next card.
Tips. “Coastal” spaces are those touching or across a Highway from
ocean (1.3.7). The Sweep could occur even during Monsoon. The
named Faction decides where to relocate its pieces (VC to any map
spaces). “Pieces” includes Bases.
Background. Vietnam’s long coastline enabled numerous US Marine
Corps and ARVN amphibious operations to support combat
operations.
68. Green Berets AUVN 1964
Elite trainers: Place 3 Irregulars or 3 Rangers in a Province without
NVA Control. Set it to Active Support.
Reluctant trainees: Remove any 3 Irregulars to Available and set 1
of their Provinces to Active Opposition.
Tip. A Province with 0 Population cannot be set to Support or
Opposition (1.6).
Background. The Green Berets, as romanticized by the John Wayne
film of the same title, were the US ground element that operated at
the center of US unconventional warfare operations. Deployed as
A and B teams in a series of Special Forces bases, the Green Berets
organized and led local defense operations in the Vietnamese
countryside.
69. MACV AUVN 1965
Military Assistance Command, Vietnam spurs coordination: Either
US then ARVN or NVA then VC each executes any 1 free Special
Activity. Faction executing Event stays Eligible.
Tips. Each Faction involved decides the details of its own Special
Activity. “1 free Special Activity” means within the usual maximum
number of spaces for that type of Special Activity.
Background. The Military Assistance Command, Vietnam was established
in February 1962. It was the senior US command in theater
commanded by in succession General Harkins (‘62), Westmoreland
(‘64), Abrams (‘68), and Weyand (‘72). It was located in Saigon and
coordinated most US efforts during the conflict.
70. ROKs AUVN 1965
Tough Koreans: US or ARVN free Sweep into/in then free Assault
Phu Bon and adjacent spaces as if US and as if all ARVN cubes
are US Troops.
UN troops abuse locals: Shift Qui Nhon, Phu Bon, and Khanh Hoa
each 1 level toward Active Opposition.
Tips. For the unshaded text, the executing Faction picks US or
ARVN and that faction decides the details of its Sweep and Assault.
The Sweep could occur even during Monsoon. “Phu Bon and adjacent
spaces” include Phu Bon, Qui Nhon, Binh Dinh, Kontum,
Pleiku, Khanh Hoa, and—for Assault—the 3 LoCs touching Phu 


Bon. “As if US and as if all ARVN cubes are US Troops” means that
whichever selected Faction—US or ARVN—would move and fight
with all US Troops, ARVN Troops, and Police as if all those cubes
were US Troops, including double enemy losses for any US Base in
a space, the effects of the “Abrams” Capability if in effect, and so on.
Non-player ARVN will still use Non-player ARVN priorities (8.4.4).
Background. The Republic of Korea supported the US with the
deployment of several divisions that operated in the vicinity of Qui
Nhon. They earned a reputation as aggressive fighters, but also were
accused of massacres.
71. An Loc ANUV 1968
ARVN stand firm: In a space in the South with ARVN, remove all
NVA Troops and place 3 ARVN Troops.
Conventional thrust: NVA free Marches Troops into a City and free
Attacks there twice.
Tips. “The South” means any South Vietnam spaces, including
all LoCs. The NVA March could occur even during Monsoon and
costs 0 but otherwise follows all March rules, including repeated
moves through Laos/Cambodia if the Trail is at greater than 0 and
including possibly Activating moving Guerrillas (3.3.3). The Attacks
also follow the usual rule, including either using NVA Troops or
Activating Attacking Guerrillas.
Background. During the 1972 “Nguyen Hue” offensive, also known
as the “Easter Offensive” (Pivotal Event 122), the city of An Loc
suffered a 66-day siege, in which the ARVN stopped the NVA’s
advance on Saigon.
72. Body Count ANUV 1965
Crossover point: Until Coup, Assault and Patrol add +3 Aid per
Guerrilla removed and cost 0.
MOMENTUM
“If it’s dead, it’s VC”: Place 1 VC Guerrilla in each Active Opposition
space, 2 NVA Troops in each Laos/Cambodia space.
Tip. “Cost 0” means ARVN will pay 0 Resources for these Operations,
and US pays 0 even if an ARVN Assault is added as part of
US Assault (3.2.4).
Background. One of the ill-advised combat metrics adopted by the
US Army to show military progress was enemy soldiers killed in
action, known as “body count”. Under the old operations research
adage that you are what you measure, this metric drove many combat
behaviors that were at odds with winning a hearts and minds campaign,
including—some suspected—erring on the side of declaring
any bodies found to be enemy.
73. Great Society ANUV 1965
LBJ advances social agenda: Conduct a Commitment Phase.
War wrecks economy: US moves 3 pieces from Available to out
of play.
Tips. For the unshaded text, the US as usual decides the details of
the Commitment Phase. If unshaded “Great Society” occurs while
unshaded Event 15 “Medevac” is in effect, “Medevac” affects the
immediate Commitment Phase and then stays in effect to affect the
coming Coup Round’s Commitment Phase as well. For shaded “Great
Society”, the US decides which pieces; “pieces” can include Bases.
Background. LBJ’s Great Society was his umbrella title for his
domestic agenda. It was a bold initiative to reduce poverty and
raise the US standard of living. Unfortunately, the Vietnam War’s
call on resources and political attention derailed its most significant
portions, and it ultimately was viewed as a failure.
74. Lam Son 719 ANUV 1968
Sudden incursion: Place up to 6 ARVN Troops in a Laos space.
ARVN executes a free LimOp there. Degrade Trail 2 boxes.
Southern escalation: NVA Resources +6 and +1 more for each
ARVN piece in Laos.
Tip. ARVN decides the details of the LimOp.
Background. In February to March 1971, ARVN forces attacked into
Laos to raid the Ho Chi Minh Trail’s infrastructure. The incursion
was envisioned as a way to bolster ARVN morale and give proof
that Vietnamization (Pivotal Event 123) was working. After the
initial advance slowed, NVA security forces on the Trail vigorously
counterattacked and routed the ARVN forces.
75. Sihanouk ANUV 1964
Pursuit operations: US or ARVN free Sweep into or in any Cambodia
spaces, then free Assaults in one.
Sea supply and sanctuary: VC free Rally in any Cambodia spaces
then free March from any Rally spaces. Then NVA do the same.
Tips. Whomever the executing Faction chose to Sweep would decide
the details of the Sweep and Assault. Free US Assault can add an
ARVN Assault at cost 0 (3.2.4). The Sweep or March could occur
even during Monsoon. The NVA March could include repeated
moves from Cambodia spaces if each such space just hosted NVA
Rally and if the Trail is at greater than 0 (3.3.3).
Background. The Sihanouk trail was the portion of the Ho Chi Minh
trail that operated inside of Cambodia and supplied operations in the
Mekong Delta region of South Vietnam. The Sihanouk trail received
supplies from the north via Laos and the coast. Prince Norodom
Sihanouk of Cambodia sought a balanced policy between East and
West blocs that led him to tolerate NVA presence on Cambodian
territory and North Vietnam’s use of Sihanoukville port and a “Sihanouk
Trail” from there into South Vietnam.
76. Annam ANVU 1965
North-South rivalry lingers: NVA and VC –1 Resource each per
space with both. Patronage +2.
Saigon regime seen as colonial retread: Remove Support from Hue,
Da Nang, and an adjacent Province.
Tips. “Space with both” means a space with both NVA and VC
pieces. “Remove Support” means set either Active or Passive Support
to Neutral (1.6.2).
Background. Vietnam is composed of several distinct ethnic groups.
Annam in Central Vietnam was a French Protectorate distinct from
Cochin China to the south and Tonkin to the north. Annam’s regional
capital of Hue played a prominent role during the war and was a
bastion of the Buddhist opposition against Catholic rule from Saigon.
77. Détente ANVU 1968
Communist Bloc eases off of war: Cut NVA and VC Resources each
to half their total (round down). 5Available NVA Troops out of play.
Nixon disappointed: NVA add +9 Resources or free Infiltrate. Then
VC free Rally in up to 6 spaces.
Tips. This unshaded event is the only way that pieces other than US
or ARVN—NVA—will occupy the Out of Play box (1.4.1). For the
shaded effect, the named Faction in each case decides its details.


Background. Under President Nixon, part of US strategy in Vietnam
and the Cold War in general was to effect a rapprochement with
China to further isolate the Soviet Union. An ancillary objective
was to weaken Chinese support for Hanoi (Events 42, 43, 49, and
others). Nixon achieved the rapprochement just as Mark Herman
became eligible for the draft. But Nixon expressed frustration that
China did not yet turn its back on North Vietnam.
78. General Lansdale ANVU 1965
Unconventional counterinsurgent: Set a space outside Saigon
with US or ARVN to Active Support. Add a Terror marker there.
Patronage +1.
Bureaucratic infighter: Patronage +3. No US Assault until Coup.
MOMENTUM
Tips. A Province with 0 Population cannot be set to Support (1.6).
The Terror marker would be added even if one is already in the space.
Background. General Edward Lansdale retired from the US Air
Force in 1963 and worked out of the US Embassy in Saigon from
1965 to 1968. He served as a counterinsurgency expert who advocated
for unconventional tactics that often put him at odds with the
US military.
79. Henry Cabot Lodge ANVU 1964
Ambassador proposes US protectorate: Aid +20.
Internecine enabler: Remove up to 3 ARVN pieces. Patronage +2
for each. ARVN Ineligible through next card.
Tip. “Pieces” can include Bases.
Background. Ambassador Henry Cabot Lodge was the US Ambassador
to Vietnam and both preceded and succeeded Maxwell
Taylor in that position (1963-1964, 1965-1967). He advocated for
the removal of Ngo Dinh Diem that led to a disastrous series of coups
and government instability that ultimately led to Northern victory.
80. Light at the End of the Tunnel ANVU 1968
Wind down seen: Remove 1-4 US pieces from map to Available.
For each piece, Patronage +2, shift a space 1 level toward Active
Opposition, and place 4 NVA Troops outside the South. Stay Eligible.
Tips. The Faction executing the Event decides the details. “Pieces”
can include Bases. A Province with 0 Population cannot shift (1.6).
“Outside the South” means any North Vietnam, Laos, or Cambodia
Provinces. The Faction executing the Event stays Eligible for the
next card.
Background. In late 1967, LBJ made a speech at the National Press
Club in which he talked about the war, “where the end comes into
view.” The Tet Offensive the following January (Pivotal Event 124)
soon dashed the public’s raised expectations. The administration’s
fueling of such expectations appear to have been a critical error, as
some view the Tet Offensive to have been a US/ARVN defensive
victory but a strategic loss due to the collapse of American homefront
morale.
81. CIDG AVUN 1965
Civilian Irregular Defense Groups: Replace a die roll of VC Guerrillas
in South Vietnam with Rangers, Irregulars, or Police.
Desertions and defections: Replace all Rangers, Police, and Irregulars
in a Highland space with 2 VC Guerrillas total.
Tip. For the shaded text, the Irregulars (like the Rangers and Police)
go to their Available box, not to Casualties (1.4.1).
Background. The Civilian Irregular Defense Groups were a CIA
program that had some successes at improving defenses along the
border by training and equipping locals. The US military took over
the program when the 5th Special Forces Group entered the theater
in strength and changed the program’s focus to more conventional
warfare tactics. The remnants of these groups were turned into
ARVN Rangers in 1970.
82. Domino Theory AVUN 1965
US justifies its war: Up to 3 US or 6 ARVN out-of-play pieces to
Available. Or ARVN Resources and Aid each +9.
US public doubts war’s purpose: 3 Available US Troops out of
play. Aid –9.
Tip. “Pieces” can include Bases.
Background. President Eisenhower used the image of dominos to
describe the danger of letting countries fall under Communist rule.
The theory opined that once one country in a region fell it would
create a cascading situation of aggression akin to one domino striking
another. This concept helped drive many senior-level decisions in the
1960s—including a far more massive commitment to South Vietnam
than Eisenhower would likely have intended. The fall of Laos and
Cambodia to Communist forces in the wake of that commitment
left the theory’s historical veracity far from clear. Did Hanoi cause
the dominos to fall, or did the US presence itself enable the theory?
83. Election AVUN 1965
Clean vote: 3 Passive Support spaces to Active Support. Aid +10.
Ballot stuffing defeats opposition candidate Druong Dinh Dzu: Shift
2 Cities each 1 level toward Active Opposition. Aid –15.
Tip. The spaces affected may include Saigon.
Background. In 1967, Nguyen Van Thieu (card 128) won a Presidential
election whose outcome was marred by numerous examples
of ballot manipulation. He won the election against an array of
opposition candidates, with Druong Dinh Dzu obtaining 17% of
the votes to come in second.
84. To Quoc AVUN 1968
Fear of Northern reprisal: Place 1 ARVN Troop and 1 Police in
each South Vietnam space with NVA.
Thoroughly penetrated: ARVN remove 1 in 3 cubes (round down)
each space. Place a VC Guerrilla in 3 spaces where ARVN removed.
Tip. For the shaded version, ARVN selects and must remove 1 in
3 of their own cubes (ARVN Troops or Police), not US or NVA.
The executing Faction chooses which candidate spaces to place the
VC Guerrillas.
Background. To Quoc (Fatherland) formed part of the mottos of
both the Army and National Police of the Republic of Vietnam. The
ARVN by the 1972 Easter Offensive (Pivotal Event 122) demonstrated
steadfastness in defense of Southern territory, such as at An
Loc (Event 71). National Police forces were critical to the general
security in the country. But the VC were successful in penetrating
police organization at all levels of command—a key source of the
insurgents’ intelligence advantage over the US.


85. USAID AVUN 1965
Increased help to civilians: Shift 3 COIN-Controlled spaces each
1 level toward Active Support.
More aid, more corruption: Increase or decrease any or all of ARVN
Resources, Aid, and Patronage by 2 each.
Tips. A Province with 0 Population cannot shift (1.6). The shaded
effect may increase some and decrease other totals and may thus
be useful for any Faction.
Background. The US supplied most of the funds that fueled the
war. MACV, DoD, CIA, and the State Department coordinated most
of these efforts. State Department civilians of the US Agency for
International Development deployed to Vietnam to support economic
activity there and thereby improve the lot of the populace.
86. Mandate of Heaven AVNU 1965
ARVN CAPABILITY
Anger at regime suppressed: 1 Govern space may transfer Aid to
Patronage without shifting Support.
Communism seen in harmony with Confucius: ARVN Govern and
Pacify maximum 1 space.
Tips. With the unshaded Capability, ARVN gets to decide each Govern
space transferring to Patronage whether or not to shift. With shaded,
Govern Special Activity will be “max 1” rather than “max 2” (4.3.1)
and ARVN will only be able to Pacify in at most 1 of the possible
US plus ARVN maximum of 4 spaces each Support Phase (6.3.1).
Background. There is a Confusion concept, important in Vietnamese
tradition, that a government that does not have the Mandate of Heaven
is illegitimate and may be opposed, with the obverse conferring
legitimacy and calling for obedience.
87. Nguyen Chanh Thi AVNU 1965
I Corps Commander: Place 3 ARVN pieces within 3 spaces of Hue.
Shift receiving spaces each 1 level toward Active Support.
Popular general relieved: Replace any 2 ARVN with any 2 VC
pieces within 2 spaces of Hue. Patronage +4 or -4.
Tip. A LoC or Province with 0 Population cannot shift (1.6).
Background. Thi was the very influential and effective ARVN I
Corps Commander. He was known for running his own command
in a manner not always aligned with Saigon’s strategy. Due to persistent
rumors that Thi was going to depose Ky, the two generals
understandably had a rocky relationship. Eventually, Thi’s insubordination
was the grounds upon which Ky relieved him of command
(cards 126 & 127).
88. Phan Quang Dan AVNU 1968
Dissident becomes RVN minister: Shift Saigon 1 level toward Active
Support. Patronage +5.
Oppositionist Assemblyman: Shift Saigon 1 level toward Neutral.
Patronage –5. ARVN Ineligible through next card.
Tip. Adjust the US victory marker (Support + Available) when
changing Support and the ARVN victory marker (COIN Control +
Patronage) when increasing or decreasing Patronage.
Background. Phan Quang Dan was a Republic of Vietnam opposition
leader who was imprisoned by Diem when he won a National
Assembly seat. After Diem was assassinated in late 1963, Phan
Quang Dan was released from prison and later served as RVN
Deputy Prime Minister.
89. Tam Chau AVNU 1965
Catholic backlash: Shift Saigon 1 level toward Passive Support.
Patronage +6.
Saigon Buddhists find leader: Place a VC piece in and shift Saigon
1 level toward Passive Opposition. Patronage –6.
Tip. A Base is a “piece”.
Background. Thich Tam Chau was one of the leaders of the Buddhist
riots in 1966. He headed up an organization in Saigon called
the Institute for the Propagation of the Buddhist Faith. He clashed
with another Buddhist leader, Hue-based Thich Tri Quang (Event
114) on tactics.
90. Walt Rostow AVNU 1965
COIN portfolio: Place any 2 ARVN pieces from anywhere (even
out of play) into any COIN Control spaces.
The enemy owns the night: Place any 1 Guerrilla in each Province
with ARVN. ARVN Troops Redeploy as if no Bases.
Tips. “Pieces” include Bases. For the shaded effect, the Redeploy is
once and immediate—ARVN Troops depart all Provinces and LoCs
for Cities with no NVA Control or Saigon (6.4.2).
Background. Rostow was LBJ’s National Security Advisor from
1966 until Johnson left office. Prior to that, Rostow served in the
Kennedy administration in the National Security Council organization.
He was a major advocate for intervention and escalation of
the war. He remains a very controversial figure who leveraged his
relationship with the President to have a significant impact on US
strategy during his tenure.
91. Bob Hope VUNA 1968
USO: Move any US Troops from a Province to a COIN Control
City. For each 2 moved (round down), 1 Casualty piece to Available.
Show lowers op tempo: NVA or VC move up to 3 US Troops from
any Provinces to Cities, placing a Guerrilla where each Troop was.
Tip. “Pieces” include Bases.
Background. Bob Hope was a legendary US comedian who devoted
himself to the USO (United Service Organizations Inc.). As the
Vietnam conflict developed, he continued his history of entertaining
the troops at the battlefront. In 1997, the US Congress awarded him
the status of “honorary veteran”, which he viewed as the greatest
honor that he had ever received.
92. SEALORDS VUNA 1968
Delta strategy: ARVN then US free Sweep in place or Assault in
each space adjacent to Can Tho.
Sampans: NVA or VC moves any of its pieces (including unTunneled
Bases) from Cambodia/Tay Ninh to spaces adjacent to Can Tho.
Tips. ARVN and US each decide the details of their respective
Sweeps or Assaults. “Spaces adjacent to Can Tho” include the 3
Mekong river LoC spaces.
Background. Operation Southeast Asia Lake, Ocean, River, and
Delta Strategy (SEALORDS) was led by Admiral Zumwalt (COMNAVFORV;
Commander Naval Forces Vietnam). The objective was
to disrupt NVA lines of communication in and around the Mekong
Delta. The operation came to a close in 1971.


93. Senator Fulbright VUNA 1964
Hearings stoke debate: US moves 4 US pieces from map to Available.
War skeptic: 1 Available US Base out of play. Aid –9.
Tip. A Base is a “piece”.
Background. Senator Fulbright represented Arkansas from 1945-
1975. The Senator was one of the sponsors of the Gulf of Tonkin
resolution but later became a major critic of the US war effort.
94. Tunnel Rats VUNA 1968
Subterranean specialists: Place a Tunnel marker on an Insurgent
Base in each of 2 Provinces, or remove 1 Tunneled Base from a
space with US Troops.
Tip. This is one of just a few Events that can force removal of
Tunneled Bases (5.1.1).
Background. “Tunnel Rats” was the nickname for lightly armed
US soldiers who penetrated into insurgent tunnel complexes and
engaged the enemy at arms’ length in the dark.
95. Westmoreland VUNA 1965
Root ‘em out: US free Air Lifts, then Sweeps (no moves) or Assaults
(no ARVN) in 2 spaces, then Air Strikes.
Big-unit war bypasses population: Shift 3 Provinces with no Police
each 2 levels toward Active Opposition.
Tips. For the unshaded effect, US decides the details of the unshaded
actions, which follow the usual restrictions, except that the Sweep
Op could occur even during Monsoon, Sweep is in place only because
of “no moves”, and the US Assault may not add and ARVN
Assault (because of “no ARVN”). Air Strike can include Degrading
the Trail as usual (4.2.3). For shaded, 0 Population Provinces cannot
shift from Neutral.
Background. General Westmoreland in 1964 became the second
commander of MACV (Event 69). He believed in a strategy of large
conventional battle. He advocated and sought to bring NVA regulars
into set-piece engagements in which overwhelming US superiority
in firepower and technology would break the back of the enemy
military. Westmoreland’s strategy during the critical ‘64-‘67 period
is sometimes cited as one of the reasons for US defeat in the war.
96. APC VUAN 1968
Accelerated Pacification Campaign: US and ARVN immediately
Pacify as if Support Phase, but cost is 0. Shift at most 1 level per
space.
False progress: If Tet Offensive played, return it to VC. If not, VC
execute “General uprising” as on the card (without using it).
Tips. For the unshaded text, the Pacification also removes Terror
markers for cost 0. For the shaded text, if Event #124 “Tet Offensive”
has not been executed (including because it is not used in this
scenario), execute the “Tet Offensive” Event text that follows the
flavor text “General uprising”. The disposition of the “Tet Offensive”
card is not affected.
Background. The APC or “Accelerated Pacification Campaign”
was a US post-Tet campaign based on a clear and hold strategy
(rather than search and destroy, Event 28). Basically, regular forces
cleared an area of enemy insurgents then trained and armed the
populace for local defense. The program yielded mixed success.
The Communists soon had recovered sufficient strength from the
1968 Tet defeat (Pivotal Event 124) to launch a second, albeit more
limited, Tet Offensive, this time focused on causing US casualties
rather than seizing cities. The APC was discontinued in the early
1970s as the US began its withdrawal from Vietnam.
97. Brinks Hotel VUAN 1964
NLF terror reconciles GVN-US: Aid +10, or 4 Patronage to ARVN
Resources. Flip any current RVN leader card—its text is ignored.
US billet car bombed: Shift a City that has VC by 2 levels toward
Active Opposition and add a Terror marker there.
Tips. Unshaded text has no effect on “Duong Van Minh” or “Failed
Attempt”; a flipped RVN leader card still counts as a card in the RVN
leader box, such as for Pivotal Event pre-conditions. For shaded, any
VC piece in the City—Guerrilla or Base—makes the space a candidate;
the Terror marker would be added even if one is already there.
Background. On Christmas Eve 1964, the VC deployed a car bomb
that killed 2 and injured 60 at the Brinks Hotel. The attack demonstrated
that VC terror could reach into the capital when desired.
98. Long Tan VUAN 1965
Royal Australians: Place 2 out of play US Troops into a Province or
remove all Guerrillas from all Jungle with US Troops.
VC strike newly arrived troops: 1 US Base and 1 US Troop in a
Jungle with 2+ VC Guerrillas to Casualties.
Tip. For the unshaded effect, the Troops could go into any 1 Province
except North Vietnam, not necessarily into Jungle.
Background. The Battle of Long Tan took place on August 18,
1966 between Australian and NLF (NVA and VC) forces on a large
rubber plantation. In a confused, fragmented, monsoon-soaked
engagement, the 6th Royal Australian Regiment prevailed against
a far larger enemy force.
99. Masher/White Wing VUAN 1965
Sweep flushes enemy into kill zone: US or ARVN free Sweeps 1
non-Jungle space with US and ARVN Troops. They free Assault
as US.
Poor OPSEC: VC or NVA free March Guerrillas to any 3 spaces
then free Ambush in each (even if Active).
Tips. The Sweep or Marches could occur even during Monsoon. For
the unshaded text, the executing Faction picks US or ARVN and that
Faction decides the details of its Sweep and Assault. US and ARVN
Troops both can move and Activate Guerrillas. ARVN Troops would
contribute as if US Troops, including double enemy losses for any
US Base in a space, and so on. For shaded, the executing Faction
picks VC or NVA and that Faction decides the details of the March
and Ambush. NVA March could include multiple moves from Laos/
Cambodia spaces if the Trail is at greater than 0. The Ambushes
must occur in March destinations, but need not involve Guerrillas
that Marched and could occur even if all that Faction’s Guerrillas
there were already Active.
Background. Masher/White Wing was a combined US, ROK, and
ARVN Search and Destroy operation in Bin Dinh province during
early 1966. This offensive saw the 1st Cavalry Division with Allied
support take on the NVA 3rd Division in a 42-day series of
engagements. US casualties were 288 killed and over 900 wounded,
against the declared destruction of the NVA forces that later turned
out to be incorrect.


100. Rach Ba Rai VUAN 1965
Riverines hunt Charlie: Remove all VC or all non-Troop NVA from
a Lowland with US Troops.
VC river ambush: In a Lowland with any VC, remove a die roll of
US/ARVN cubes (US to Casualties). Place 1 VC piece.
Tips. “A Lowland” means 1 Lowland Province. A “piece” can include
a Base. “US to Casualties” means that any US pieces removed
go to the Casualties box, while ARVN pieces removed go to ARVN
Available Forces as usual (1.4.1).
Background. Known to counterinsurgent forces as Coronado V, the
engagements at Rach Ba Rai occurred in September-October 1966
in the Mekong Delta. The fighting featured a series of sweeps and
engagements with the VC 263rd Main Force Battalion (the type of
unit represented by Event 104).
101. Booby Traps VNUA 1964
VC CAPABILITY
Preparations tip off enemy: VC and NVA Ambush is max 1 space.
Mines and punji: Each Sweep space, VC afterward removes
1 Sweeping Troop on roll of 1-3 (US to Casualties).
Tip. “US to Casualties” means that any US pieces removed go to the
Casualties box, while ARVN pieces removed go to ARVN Available
Forces as usual (1.4.1).
Background. The VC were primarily a light-armed force that
deployed an array of ancient and modern anti-personnel devices
to harass and kill COIN forces during the conflict. The VC were
ingenious in their use of discarded US war material and unexploded
ordnance to build these devices, but many other devices were
ancient traps constructed from sharpened sticks, employing pits or
plant tension to ensnare their target.
102. Cu Chi VNUA 1965
Clear and secure: Remove all Guerrillas from 1 space with a Tunnel
and COIN Control.
Iron Triangle: Place Tunnel markers on each Insurgent Base in 1
Province. Place 1 NVA and 1 VC Guerrilla there.
Tip. “A Tunnel” means a Tunneled Base.
Background. Located in Binh Duong province (between Tay Ninh
and Phuoc Long), the tunnel complexes near Cu Chi extended for
several hundred miles and remained under VC control during the
entire war. The US and ARVN forces conducted several famous
offensives to reclaim the region such as Operations Attleboro (Event
23), Cedar Falls, and Junction City.
103. Kent State VNUA 1968
National Guard imposes order: Any 2 US Casualties to Available.
1 free US LimOp. US Eligible.
National Guard overreacts: Up to 3 US Troop Casualties out of
play. Aid –6. US Ineligible through next card.
Tip. For the unshaded text, place the US Eligibility Cylinder from
wherever it is into the “Eligible Factions” box. If US executed the
Event and ARVN 2nd Eligible, ARVN may execute Ops & Special
Activity as usual.
Background. In response to the US invasion of Cambodia (Event
62), there was a surge of anti-war protests across US college campuses.
On May 4, 1970, Ohio National Guardsmen fired on Kent
State student protesters, killing four and wounding nine. The public
backlash to the shooting and fears of further government reprisal
closed colleges across the country.
104. Main Force Bns VNUA 1965
VC CAPABILITY
Larger footprints: March into Support/LoC Activates if moving plus
non-Base COIN >1 (vice >3).
Hard-hitting guerrillas: 1 VC Ambush space may remove 2 enemy
pieces.
Tip. The shaded Capability will enable each VC Ambush Special
Activity to remove up to a total of 3 enemy pieces between its
maximum 2 spaces.
Background. Due to initial US successes with their sweeps, the VC
worked to upgrade the weaponry and tactics of their Main Force
Battalions. A good example is the effectiveness of the 261st Main
Force Battalion in Ap Bac against an ARVN 7th Division assault in
the Mekong Delta region.
105. Rural Pressure VNUA 1965
Onerous VC Taxation: Shift 4 Provinces with any VC each by 1 level
toward Active Support.
Local government corruption: Shift 3 Provinces with Police each
by 1 level toward Active Opposition. Patronage +6 or –6.
Tip. A Province with 0 Population cannot be shifted from Neutral
(1.6).
Background. This event acknowledges the intense conflict that
occurred for the hearts and minds of the rural hamlet culture of Vietnam.
The same villagers who traditionally had seen little government
presence of any use to them later came to resent the squeeze of VC
who needed ever increasing support to fight the invader.
106. Binh Duong VNAU 1965
Revolutionary land reform seeks traction in prosperous districts: In
each of 2 Provinces adjacent to Saigon, shift Support/Opposition
1 level either direction and place a VC Guerrilla or Police.
Tip. Shifting toward Opposition and placing Police would be a legal
(if unusual) move.
Background. Both sides preached land reform in an attempt to
redistribute land from wealthy landowners to a broader class of farmers.
Binh Duong Province near the capital region was the relatively
prosperous locale of one such initiative. While powerful landowners
neutered ARVN efforts at land reform, VC efforts of indoctrination,
intimidation, and execution were more effective.
107. Burning Bonze VNAU 1964
Gruesome protests close elite ranks: Patronage +3 or, if Saigon at
Active Support, +6.
Anti-regime self-immolation: Shift Saigon 1 level toward Active
Opposition. Aid –12.
Tip. Adjust the ARVN victory marker (COIN Control + Patronage)
when increasing or decreasing Patronage, the US victory marker
(Support + Available) if changing Support, and the VC victory
marker (Opposition + Bases) if adding Opposition.
Background. Diem and the governments that followed him in Saigon
had a strong core of Catholics who stood in opposition to the
Buddhist leadership centered in the ancient capital at Hue. One of
the iconic images of Vietnam was the self-immolation performed by
five Buddhist monks to protest Saigon’s Catholic policies.


108. Draft Dodgers VNAU 1965
Public furor sparks enlistment: If fewer than 3 Casualty pieces, 3
US Troops from out of play to Available.
Recruiting sags: Move 1 US Troop per Casualty piece, to a maximum
of 3, from Available to out of play.
Tip. “Pieces” include Bases.
Background. As the Vietnam War’s unpopularity in the United
States grew, some men called up for service left the country to avoid
military induction. President Carter pardoned all draft dodgers soon
after taking office.
109. Nguyen Huu Tho VNAU 1965
Party control of NLF draws anti-communist reaction: Shift each
City with VC 1 level toward Active Support.
National Liberation Front leader: Place a VC Base and a VC Guerrilla
in Saigon.
Tip. The VC Base cannot be placed if there are already 2 of any
Factions’ Bases in Saigon (1.4.2, 5.1.1).
Background. Tho was a VC leader stationed Saigon who successfully
organized revolutionary cells. Tho laid the groundwork for
the infrastructure that supported the Tet offensive attacks in Saigon
in 1968. Some have described him as a mere figurehead, masking
Northern control of the NLF with the appearance of indigenous
Southern leadership.
110. No Contact VNAU 1964
Respite: Place 2 Casualties onto the map. All Rangers and Irregulars
Underground.
Charlie bugs out: Flip all VC and NVA Guerrillas Underground.
Tip. The unshaded text allows selection of any 2 pieces from the
Casualties box—Troops, Irregulars, or Bases—and their placement
into any map spaces where they may stack (1.4.2).
Background. A key military tactic is to find and fix the enemy to
eliminate him. In general, the VC and NVA had superior tactical
intelligence on the location of COIN forces and, when faced with
superior numbers, would often avoid contact.
111. Agent Orange VAUN 1968
Counter-sanctuary chemical: All Insurgents in Jungle go Active. US
free Air Strikes among up to any 2 Jungle spaces (no effect on Trail).
Industrial defoliation: Shift each Jungle and Highland with Insurgents
1 level toward Active Opposition.
Tips. For the unshaded text, the US decides the details of the Air
Strike but may not Degrade the Trail. For shaded, a Province with
0 Population cannot be shifted from Neutral (1.6).
Background. Agent Orange was a defoliant chemical named for
the orange striped canisters it was delivered in from Monsanto and
Dow Chemicals. The chemical was employed in Operation Ranch
Hand, whose goal was to deny the insurgents cover and concealment.
While technically not a form of chemical warfare, soldiers
and civilians exposed to strong concentrations of Agent Orange have
been documented to suffer from significant long-term health effects.
112. Colonel Chau VAUN 1964
Census-grievance teams: Place 1 Police into each of 6 Provinces.
Local Viet Minh tradition: Shift 3 Provinces with ARVN each 1 level
toward Active Opposition. Place a VC Guerrilla in each.
Tip. A Province with 0 Population cannot be shifted from Neutral
(1.6).
Background. Tran Ngoc Chau was a former member of the Viet
Minh who due to his Buddhist views changed sides and distinguished
himself as an innovative administrator and counterinsurgency tactician.
He devised “census-grievance teams” to establish the first
benign government presence in villages contested by the VC, and
thereby gain information on VC infrastructure—often in the face of
local Viet Minh resistance tradition and therefore pro-VC sentiment.
113. Ruff Puff VAUN 1968
RF/PF–Regional and Popular Forces: Place up to 8 Police in the
South.
Ill-trained, thoroughly subverted: Replace 5 Police outside Cities
with 1 VC piece each—1 of the VC pieces may be a Base.
Tip. In the unshaded text, “in the South” means into any spaces in
South Vietnam, including any LoCs. For shaded, only 1 VC piece
placed may be a Base, the others must be Guerrillas.
Background. The US response to VC insurgency at the hamlet level
was channeled through the host of local security elements known as
Ruff Puffs. The performance of these units ran the full gamut from
high quality to inept. While a significant component of the CORDS
program (Event 19), the RF/PF proved incapable of overcoming the
instability radiating from Saigon.
114. Tri Quang VAUN 1965
Buddhists counter Communists: Set up to 3 Neutral or Opposition
Cities to Passive Support.
People’s Revolutionary Committee: Shift Hue, Da Nang, and Saigon
1 level toward Active Opposition. Place a VC piece in Saigon.
Tip. A “piece” may be a Base.
Background. Tri Quang was a non-communist leader of the Buddhist
opposition in Hue. He led the Buddhist revolt that saw 5 Bonzes
immolate themselves in protest against Diem’s policies. After Diem,
he remained a potent political force, eventually arrested under Ky.
115. Typhoon Kate VAUN 1968
Year of storms: Until Coup, no Air Lift, Transport, or Bombard, and
all other Special Activities are maximum 1 space. Executing Faction
stays Eligible.
MOMENTUM
Tip. When “Typhoon Kate” is in effect during Monsoon, no Air
Lift is allowed, and Air Strike is limited to 1 space not 2 (5.1.1).
Background. There have been a number of Typhoons named Kate
over the decades. In 1970, a super Typhoon Kate devastated the
Philippines and Vietnam. This event represents extreme weather
beyond the annual Monsoon that is built into the game system.


116. Cadres VANU 1964
VC CAPABILITY
Manpower to political sections: VC to Terror or Agitate must remove
2 VC Guerrillas per space.
NLF village committees: VC Rally in 1 space where VC already
had a Base may Agitate as if Support Phase even if COIN Control.
Tip. For the unshaded effect, if VC have fewer than 2 Guerrillas in
a space, they may not execute Terror or Agitate there, until they do
have 2 Guerrillas there to remove.
Background. As famously described in Frances FitzGerald’s book,
VC tactics emphasized the insertion of politicized cadres into the
countryside villages, where they worked to first ingratiate themselves
to the local population and later mobilize them for the conflict. The
core of the US hearts and minds campaign revolved around neutralizing
this potent guerrilla infrastructure.
117. Corps Commanders VANU 1968
ARVN general takes initiative: ARVN places 3 of its Troops from out
of play or Available into 1 or 2 adjacent spaces then free Sweeps each.
Corps CO ignores Saigon: Remove a die roll of ARVN pieces from
1 or 2 adjacent spaces. ARVN Ineligible through next card.
Tip. For the unshaded text, the ARVN Faction decides from and to
where to place the Troops.
Background. Due to instability at the core of the RVN government,
the ARVN Corps Commanders tended to have a degree of autonomy
from Saigon. This event characterizes these powerful and potentially
volatile general officers’ impact on operations.
118. Korean War Arms VANU 1964
Obsolete: VC must remove 1 VC Guerrilla from each space with at
least 2 and no NVA Base.
NLF gets US arms captured in Korea: Place any 1 VC piece in
each of 3 spaces.
Tips. For the unshaded text, because VC are deciding on removal,
they may remove Active rather than Underground VC Guerrillas.
For shaded, a “piece” may be a Base.
Background. Early in the conflict all forms of older weapons from
WWII and the Korean War were supplied to the NVA and in turn
to the VC. These weapons varied in quality depending on how they
were stored and maintained.
119. My Lai VANU 1968
US LT convicted: 2 Available US Troops out of play. Patronage +2.
Massacre: Set a Province with US Troops to Active Opposition. VC
place a Base and Guerrilla there. Aid –6.
Tip. Provinces with 0 Population do not shift from Neutral.
Background. On March 16, 1968, a platoon of the 23rd Infantry
Division under the command of 2nd Lt. William Calley Jr. massacred
22 villagers during a combat mission. Initially, the incident was
covered up, but it eventually came to light in November of 1969.
The revelation and subsequent trial of Calley drew major protests
worldwide and contributed to the weakening of US public support
for the war.
120. US Press Corps VANU 1968
Initial support: Move US pieces from out of play to map—4 if 0-2
cards in RVN Leader box, 2 if 3-5.
Building skepticism: US Troop Casualties up to cards in RVN Leader
box plus all US Base Casualties go out of play.
Tips. “Pieces” can include Bases. For the shaded text, count the
number of Coup cards (including any “Failed Attempt” cards) in
the RVN Leader box: the executing Faction selects that number
of non-Base pieces in the Casualties box—in addition to all Bases
there—to move to the Out of Play box.
Background. The Vietnam War became known as the first TV
war, when, every evening, correspondents such as Walter Cronkite
brought the war into America’s living rooms. Whether reflecting
or contributing to public sentiment, US war journalism became
progressively less supportive of US engagement over the course
of the conflict.
121. Linebacker II UAVN
US Pivotal Event—Play if 2+ cards in RVN Leader box and Support+Available
>40.
Unrestricted air war: NVA removes 2 Bases, Resources –15, Ineligible
through next card. 6 Casualties or 3 US out of play to Available.
Not if Coup! showing as next card.
Tips. Do not count Duong Van Minh—an RVN leader but not a
card—for the precondition (2.4.1). The NVA Faction decides which
2 of its Bases to remove, then loses 15 Resources and is marked
Ineligible. The US decides which Casualties or US out-of-play pieces
(including Bases) then move to Available.
Background. After years of graduated, limited, and paused US
bombing of North Vietnam, President Nixon on December 18, 1972
unleashed the full conventional power of the US Air Force in an 11-
day bombing campaign to bring Hanoi back to the negotiating table
in Paris and finally bring US PoWs (Event 40) home.
122. Easter Offensive NVAU
NVA Pivotal Event—Play if 2+ cards in RVN Leader box and more
NVA Troops than US Troops on map.
Invasion: NVA free Marches. Then NVA Troops on LoCs with no
US/ARVN may move 1 space. Then all NVA Troops free Attack.
Not if Coup! next. May trump Pivotal U.
Tips. Do not count Minh as a card for the precondition. “On map”
means in South Vietnam, North Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia
combined. NVA March may include the usual multiple moves in or
out of Laos/Cambodia spaces (unless the Trail is at “0”, 3.3.2). NVA
Troops must Attack wherever there are enemies; NVA Guerrillas
may March but do not Attack.
Background. The “Nguyen Hue” campaign of 1972 was an all-out
Northern offensive that severely tested the strength of the ARVN in
the void of the US withdrawal. The NVA onslaught illustrated their
emerging mechanized capability. The flipside of mechanization was
that US airpower was designed to defeat such a force. Although some
Southern territory was lost, airpower turned the tide and neutralized
the NVA drive on Saigon.


123. Vietnamization AUNV
ARVN Pivotal Event—Play if 2+ cards in RVN Leader box and
<20 US Troops on map.
Mechanization: +12 ARVN Resources. +12 Aid. All out-of-play
ARVN Available. Place 4 ARVN cubes anywhere.
Not if Coup! next. May trump Pivotal NU.
Tips. Do not count Minh as a card for the precondition. “On map”
means in South Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia combined.
Background. Vietnamization was the Nixon administration’s term
for turning the war over to the ARVN and beginning the US withdrawal.
While this strategy had been pursued in some fashion since
the beginning of the war, it was Nixon’s determination to alter the US
relationship with the ARVN that made its implementation a necessity.
Materially, it meant mechanizing the ARVN and providing it with
far more up-to-date weaponry than the US had granted it heretofore.
The Lam Son 719 debacle (Event 74) showed that its success would
take time, but the 1972 stand against the Easter Offensive (Event 71
and Pivotal Event 122) appeared to vindicate the approach.
124. Tet Offensive VNUA
VC Pivotal Event—Play if 2+ cards in RVN Leader box and >20
VC Guerrillas in South.
General uprising: Free Terror with 1 Underground VC per space.
Place 6 VC pieces in any Cities. VC+NVA Guerrillas free Attack
where enemies (remove VC first).
Not if Coup! next. May trump Pivotal ANU.
Tips. Do not count Minh as a
card for the precondition. “In
South” means among all South
Vietnam spaces, including
all LoCs. Carry out the steps
in order. Terror is mandatory
wherever Underground VC
Guerrillas—even if no shift
will benefit the VC—Activating
1 Underground VC Guerrilla
each such space. If Terror
markers will run out, it is up to
the VC (random if Non-player)
to decide the order of Terror
spaces. Attacks are mandatory
where VC or NVA Guerrillas
are located with any enemies,
Activating all those Guerrillas, and include VC who just executed
Terror. If both VC and NVA Guerrillas occupy such a space, add
their numbers together to determine the die roll needed for success,
removing VC before NVA if possible when US Troop or Base losses
result in Attrition (3.3.3). See also Non-player Example 1, earlier
in this Playbook.
Background. In 1968, the NLF (VC and NVA) launched a massive
offensive timed to a cultural holiday season. The objective was to
capture major urban centers and raise the populace in revolt against
the RVN government. The resulting counteroffensive decimated
the ranks of the VC, enabling Hanoi to take greater control over
the war effort. Counteroffensive operations by ARVN in particular
also created tremendous damage to civilian infrastructure, while US
casualties and the shock to the US public began an unrecoverable
downward spiral in backing for the war.
125. Coup! Nguyen Khanh
Corps commanders ascendant: Transport uses max 1 LoC space.
Conduct Coup Round: Victory? to Reset
Monsoon: If this card next, no Sweep or March, Air Lift & Air
Strike max 2.
Tip. “Nguyen Khanh” restricts Transport throughout the coming
campaign, until Khanh is replaced by a Coup card other than “Failed
Attempt” (2.4.1). Usually, Transport can move ARVN Troops and
Rangers through a string of LoCs and Cities, but “Khanh” limits
such strings may include only 1 LoC space each Transport Special
Activity (4.3.2).
Background. See “Duong Van Minh” below.
126. Coup! Young Turks
Thi, Ky, & Thieu wag the US dog: Each ARVN Govern Special
Activity adds +2 Patronage.
Conduct Coup Round: Victory? to Reset
Monsoon: If this card next, no Sweep or March, Air Lift & Air
Strike max 2.
Tip. The bonus Patronage is +2 per each occasion of a Govern
Special Activity, not per space.
Background. See “Duong Van Minh” below.
127. Coup! Nguyen Cao Ky
Brash brass Ky: Pacification costs 4 Resources per Terror or level.
Conduct Coup Round: Victory? to Reset
Monsoon: If this card next, no Sweep or March, Air Lift & Air
Strike max 2.
Tip. The 4-Resource Pacification cost replaces the usual 3‑Resource
cost, for both US and ARVN, in the following Support Phase and
during the coming campaign.
Background. See “Duong Van Minh” below.
128. Coup! Nguyen Van Thieu
Stabilizer: No effect.
Conduct Coup Round: Victory? to Reset
Monsoon: If this card next, no Sweep or March, Air Lift & Air
Strike max 2.
Tip. “Nguyen Van Thieu” cancels the effect of the previous leader.
Background. See “Duong Van Minh” below.
129. & 130. Coup! Failed Attempt
Desertion: ARVN removes 1 in 3 of its cubes per space (round
down). Place below any RVN Leader card.
Conduct Coup Round: Victory? to Reset
Monsoon: If this card next, no Sweep or March, Air Lift & Air
Strike max 2.
Tips. In contrast to the other Coup cards, “Failed Attempt” has
an immediate not lasting effect. The ARVN Faction removes its
cubes—adjusting Control accordingly (1.7)—before the Coup
Round commences with the Victory Phase. After carrying out that
effect, place the “Failed Attempt” card underneath the top card in the
RVN Leader box, or just in the box if no card is yet there. “Failed
Attempt” cancels only “Duong Van Minh” (resulting in no lingering
effect at all). It leaves any other RVN Leader still in effect. Each 


played “Failed Attempt” nevertheless counts as a card in the RVN
Leader box (such as for Pivotal Event preconditions, 2.3.8).
Background. See “Duong Van Minh” below.