1. Quadrillage
Sector forces: Place up to all French
Police in Available in up to 3 spaces.
Exploit unit boundaries: FLN executes
2 free Limited Marches.
Background: The great majority
of French forces committed to the
war were “sector troops” who were
deployed in a dispersed pattern
suggestive of the grid squares on a
military map across the countryside
(hence quadrillage) to control the
population and interfere with FLN operations.
2. Balky Conscripts
Aux armes citoyens! Free Train in up to 2 selectable spaces.
Pas avec moi: Until Propaganda, Government may not Deploy
French Police from Available.
FLN MOMENTUM
Background: The war in Algeria was not popular in France, especially
among the young draftees sent to fight in it. There were
numerous cases of sit-down strikes and near mutinies among units
detailed for Algeria, especially in the time of the initial mobilization
period of 1955-56, when tens of thousands of reservists who had
already served 18 months were kept on for service in Algeria.
3. Leadership Snatch
Gotcha! Activate all Guerrillas in 1 Wilaya.
Widespread rage: Set up to 2 FLN-Controlled spaces to Oppose.
Background: In October 1956, the French captured five major
leaders of the FLN, including Ahmed Ben Bella (a founding member
who would become Algeria’s first President), by diverting their
aircraft to Algeria (they had been travelling to Tunisia to meet with
President Bourguiba). It was a great intelligence coup, but the local
and international reaction was very hostile.
4. Oil & Gas Discoveries
Executor of the Event may add up to +2 Commitment. French cubes
equal to twice the Commitment added are removed from the map
or Available to Out of Play (Government player’s choice exactly
which cubes go).
Background: The discovery of substantial oil deposits in the Sahara
desert (off the southern edge of the game map) in 1956 encouraged
the French government to intensify its efforts to keep Algeria. This
was also a factor in its decision to grant independence to Morocco
and Tunisia, in order to save effort resisting the independence movements
in these colonies. But exploiting these resources required
deployment of security forces to protect pipelines and drilling sites.
5. Peace of the Brave
Amnesty: Until Propaganda, in each selected Sweep or Assault space,
may also pay an extra 1 Resource to remove 1 Guerrilla (may be
Underground, maximum 1 per space, removed to Available).
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
Fight like hell: Free Rally in any 2 selectable spaces.
Background: In October 1958, de Gaulle promised amnesty for
thousands of existing FLN prisoners, and eventually to commute
all death sentences. He also offered the “paix des braves” a fresh
amnesty offered to FLN members who would desert.
6. Factionalism
Friction: Either remove up to 3 Guerrillas in any 1 Wilaya to Available,
or move the France Track up to 2 boxes towards “A”.
Lube: Free Rally in any 1 selectable space with a Base.
Background: There was constant dissension among the political
leadership of the FLN and the leadership of the movement’s military
wing, the Armee de Liberation Nationale (ALN), on how best to
conduct the war against the French. This is a weakness as common
to insurgent movements as it is to the governments that oppose them.
7. 5th Bureau
Psychological warfare: Choose 1 Wilaya and roll 1d6; if roll ≤ total
Guerrillas there, remove up to (the number rolled) Guerrillas from
that Wilaya to Available.
Propaganda flop: Shift any 2 Sectors 1 level each towards Opposition.

Background: The “5th Bureau” was the psychological warfare
branch of the French military operation in Algeria. Besides producing
the usual forms of printed and audiovisual propaganda, the Bureau
also made frequent use of “turned” insurgents to spread false information
and rumours, which exploited the Wilaya leaders’ fears and
mistrust of each other. The Bureau also created several “false flag”
and pseudo-guerrilla operations to further confuse the insurgents.
However, many of the officers of the 5th Bureau were identified with
senior leaders who were opposed to de Gaulle, and when several of
them participated in the “Week of the Barricades” in January 1960
de Gaulle disbanded the organization the following month.
The illustration is of Colonel Roger Trinquier, who wrote Modern
Warfare: A French View of Counterinsurgency (1961) in which he
emphasized the role groups of government-created irregular troops
could play in resisting and defeating insurgents.
8. Cross-border air strike
Effective: Remove up to 3 Guerrillas
(may be Underground) from either
Morocco or Tunisia (if independent)
to Available.
Helicopter Maintenance: Until Propaganda
Round, lower number of
Troop Lift spaces by 1.
FLN MOMENTUM
Background: The FLN operated
with near-impunity from camps in
Morocco and Tunisia. On several
occasions the French did strike across the border with air power: the
best known incident was near the Tunisian town of Sakiet in February
1958. After several months of border incidents in the area, the French
Air Force destroyed most of the town using American-supplied B-26
bombers. At least 68 civilians were killed and this provoked a major
international incident.
16 

9. Beni-Oui-Oui
Executor sets up to 2 non-Terrorized Neutral spaces to Support or
Opposition.
Background: “Beni-Oui-Oui” was a pejorative term that could be
translated as “Tribe of the Yes-men”, to characterize those older
Algerians, often long-service veterans of France’s wars, who felt
they had a stake in continuing French rule of the country.
10. Moudjahidine
Braggadocio: Activate all Guerrillas in any 1 Wilaya.
Sign me up: Until Propaganda Round, treat each Rally in a FLN-Controlled
space with no Base as if it contained 1 Base.
FLN MOMENTUM
11. Bananes
H-21 helicopters: Until Propaganda Round, raise number of Troop
Lift spaces by 2.
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
Misguided airstrike incident: –1 Commitment.
Background: The Piasecki H-21 Shawnee, nicknamed “the banana”
by the French troops, was one of the first troop-carrying helicopters
to be used in large numbers in the Cold War. It could carry 20 troops
and had a range of about 265 miles.
12. Ventilos
S-55 helicopters: Until Propaganda
Round, raise number of Troop Lift
spaces by 1.
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
FLN Navy: May redistribute 1-3
Guerrillas (1d6 halved, round up)
among any 3 coastal spaces for free.
Guerrillas do not Activate.
Background: The Sikorsky S-55,
also known as the H-19 Chickasaw
and nicknamed “the fan” by the
French troops, was the first helicopter to be used by the French in
Algeria. It carried up to 12 troops and had a range of over 400 miles
but was replaced in beginning in late 1957 by the more reliable H-21
Shawnee. The French also experimented with arming S-55s with
20mm cannon, rocket launchers, and machine guns, so creating the
first helicopter gunships.
The FLN was able to infiltrate small numbers of fighters and weapons
along the coast of Algeria, despite the best efforts of the French Navy.
13. SAS
GOVERNMENT CAPABILITY
Hearts and minds: Train may Pacify in up to 2 selectable spaces.
Caution: Assault may target only 1 space per card.
Background: SAS stands for Sections Administrative Spécialisées
(Special Administrative Sections). Their mission was to extend the
reach and influence of the French colonial power in the rural areas of
Algeria. The program started in 1955, and expanded rapidly. French
officers called képis bleus (blue caps) were given special language
and administrative training, and were sent to assume control of all
aspects of life in selected rural villages. An SAS officer was a source
of military and civil authority and decision making, and killing him
was a common objective of insurgents operating in his sector. SAS
officers also recruited large numbers of moghazni, irregular troops
armed with shotguns or old rifles, for protecting villages and gathering
intelligence. Some SAS officers were much better at their jobs
than others but generally the program was a success.
14. Protest in Paris
Executor of Event may move France Track marker up to 2 spaces
left or right.
Background: Paris witnessed many demonstrations against the
French government and the war, both by expatriate Algerians
and by left-wing parties and trade unions. Some turned violent:
in October 1961, French police attacked a demonstration of over
30,000 Algerians and as many as 200 were killed. The effect of
this card is to either suppress or inflame reaction to the war. It also
partly accounts for the “Café Wars”, the sustained vicious struggle
between the FLN and the Mouvement Nationale Algerien, its main
organizational rival, as they vied for the support of the hundreds of
thousands of Algerian expatriates working in France.
15. Jean-Paul Sartre
Writes a play, donates royalties: +2
FLN Resources.
Signs manifesto: –1 Commitment.
(And either way, he and Albert
Camus are not friends anymore.)
Background: This card reflects the
actions of French intellectuals and
cultural figures in opposing the war,
particularly the use of torture by
French forces. The “Manifesto of
the 121”, a declaration published in
September 1960 is an example of this and helped to mobilize public
opinion and action against the war. Sartre was very vocal in support
of the FLN and was the target of at least one assassination attempt
by the OAS. Meanwhile, the writer Albert Camus, born in Algeria,
defended the French government’s actions and supported the idea
of co-existence and peaceful negotiation. He was ostracised by leftwing
intellectuals for this.
16. NATO
Force de Frappe releases conventional troops: Move 1d6 French
cubes from Out of Play to Available.
Continental war scare: Move 1d6 French cubes from Available or
map to Out of Play (Government player’s choice which).
Either way, no change in Commitment.
Background: By 1958, almost half of the French Army was deployed
to Algeria. This seriously diminished its contribution to the
defense of Europe and strained relations with NATO and the United
States. The decision that France should develop nuclear weapons
and use them in its defense had been taken in the early 1950s, and
de Gaulle’s decision in 1958 to create the Force de Frappe (Striking
Force) as a nuclear-armed force independent of NATO command
was a further step down this road.


17. Commandos
FLN CAPABILITY
Commandos de Chasse: Each Algerian cube participating in a Garrison
or Sweep in Mountain Sector Activates 1 Guerrilla.
Zonal Commandos: Ambush does not Activate the Guerrilla.
Background: The Commandos de Chasse were very effective.
Composed mostly of former FLN insurgents, they operated in platoon
to company-sized units and would go on long range patrols in
FLN controlled territory in order to determine the location of FLN
units. When they located an FLN unit they would follow it and,
once it was in a vulnerable location, guide air strikes or airmobile
intervention forces onto it to destroy or disrupt it. For its part, the
FLN would group its best trained and best equipped fighters as
“zonal” commandos, who would have the job of executing complex
ambushes or raids.
A set of markers has been provided for you to place in the 19
Mountain spaces as a reminder of the “Commandos de Chasse”
Capability’s effects.
18. Torture
DUAL CAPABILITY
–1 Commitment for each Neutralize executed. In each selected
Neutralize space, may remove 1 additional piece, which may be
Underground. (Guerrillas before Bases rule still applies, removed
Guerrilla goes to Available or Casualties depending on sequence).
Background: The card illustration is of a “gegene”, a hand-cranked
electrical generator normally used to power radios or field telephone
systems. Interrogators would attach the electrodes to different body
parts of FLN prisoners to extract confessions; many other methods
of physical coercion were used, involving water, suspension,
physical beatings, rape and sleep deprivation. During and after the
war, military men and analysts never agreed as to whether torture
was most effective as a way to gain information, or as a means to
demonstrate resolve and demoralize the insurgent enemy, or whether
it accomplished anything at all besides moral decay and atrocities
additional to those the FLN habitually committed (the effects of
which have been worked into the game through the Terror operation).
Sixty years later, even as French society reluctantly comes to terms
with the Algerian War, the debate continues.
This card is presented as a dual Capability that has good and bad
effects for both players every time it is used: the short-term military
benefit to the Government player has a long-term political cost.
19. General Strike
Heads broken: Set 1 selected City to
Neutral. Add Commitment = Population
of City.
United Nations resolution condemning
violence raises FLN profile: +2
FLN Resources.
Background: This card can represent
a general strike by either side.
In February 1956 angry pieds-noirs
welcomed the then Prime Minister,
Guy Mollet, with a strike and mob
violence, which led him to change his stance on the war and become
committed to France’s “civilizing mission” in Algeria. This resulted
in the government gaining special powers to suppress the FLN,
and both a recall of conscripts and an extension of their military
service. Meanwhile, the climax of the “Battle of Algiers” in 1957
was a general strike by the Muslim population of the city, meant
to demonstrate the influence and authority of the FLN but which
crumbled under the heavy-handed response.
20. Sauve qui peut
Defections and desertions: Executor of Event may remove up to 3
Guerrillas or Algerian Police to Available, paying 1 Resource each.
Background: In hopes of making the enemy troops surrender, desert
or simply sit on their hands, both sides exercised considerable
psychological pressure, from propaganda and bribes to threats,
blackmail, mutilations, and massacres.
21. United Nations Resolution
Mind your own business! +1 Commitment.
Binding: –1 Commitment.
Background: The United Nations frequently discussed the Algerian
question from the time of the beginning of the revolt in 1954. On
December 20, 1960, the United Nations formally recognized Algeria’s
right to self-determination. This strengthened international
condemnation of France’s actions, even though they were about to
enter peace negotiations with the FLN.
22. The Government of
the United States of
America is Convinced…
FLN are Communists: +2 Commitment.
Algeria is entitled to self-determination:
–2 Commitment.
Background: Diplomatic relations
between the United States and
France were mostly cordial during
the war, though there were episodes
of tension. The United States at
the time regarded Arab and African nationalism as an inevitable
byproduct of and reaction to the long British and French colonial
dominations. This attitude tested the long friendship between the
two countries as the United States tried to take the middle ground.
This position was further complicated by fears that the FLN was
infiltrated by Communists, and that American military aid supplied
to France for NATO purposes was promptly used in Algeria. (In
fact, while it may have been pleased to receive recognition and aid
from Communist countries, the FLN was philosophically strongly
anti-Communist.)
23. Diplomatic Leanings
Pressure on protectorates: Remove up to 1 Base in each of Morocco
and Tunisia (if independent). No increase in Commitment.
Arab Bloc solidarity: +6 FLN Resources.
Background: Even though Morocco and Tunisia had been given
independence, France still exerted considerable influence over the
new governments and retained military bases in both countries for
some time. 
18 

24. Economic Development
Constantine Plan: Set up to 2 Government-Controlled spaces to
Support.
Military funds diverted to social enterprises: –6 Government Resources.
Background: The Constantine Plan announced by Charles de
Gaulle in October 1958 was an ambitious scheme to improve the
standard of living for Algeria’s Muslim population. Distribution
of land, construction of housing and schools, raising salaries and
other initiatives were intended to address their grievances and build
support for continued French rule.
25. Purge
Disloyal commanders: 1-3 enemy pieces (1d6 halved, round up;
executor’s choice, but not Bases) moved from map to Available;
and –1d6 Enemy Resources.
Background: Senior commanders and unit leaders on both sides
were often transferred or dismissed if they were seen to be unsupportive
of the political leadership’s policies and decisions. This
normally had a disruptive effect on operations.
26. Casbah
Ratonnade: Remove up to all FLN
pieces in Algiers to Available. +1
Commitment per Base removed,
+1 FLN Resource for each piece
removed.
Urban uprising: Place up to 4 Guerrillas
in Algiers. If this makes Algiers
FLN-Controlled, may Agitate up to 1
level for free.
Background: The Casbah was the
main Arab quarter in Algiers. Over
80,000 people lived in a 40-acre maze of buildings and narrow
alleys, a natural insurgent sanctuary in the middle of the city.
“Ratonnade” means “rat hunt”, from French racist slang for North
Africans. The “Battle of Algiers” fought during 1957 by elements
of the 10th Parachute Division under General Jacques Massu
comprehensively dismantled the FLN infrastructure in the Casbah;
however, in December 1960 a near-spontaneous uprising restored
disorder to the city.
27. Covert Movement
Dead Zones: FLN Guerrillas may not March again if in same Wilaya.
Cross-Wilaya coordination: In Redeploy Phase, Guerrillas may
move from any spaces to any spaces with friendly Bases. All spaces
must be in Algeria.
FLN CAPABILITY
Background: FLN guerrillas generally had freedom of movement,
especially in populated areas—however, when there was no developed
network of safe houses, trails and hideouts in an area, they were
not able to make long distance moves easily. Poor communication
and mistrust among Wilaya commanders was also a factor.
28. Atrocities and Reprisals
Executor of Event may place up to 2 Terror markers, placed after
paying 1 Resource per marker, in any spaces in Algeria (even if
Terror already present). Set these spaces to Neutral. –1 Commitment
for each Terror marker placed (no matter who executed the Event).
Background: Both sides were responsible for savage and grotesque
atrocities during the war, and one violent incident would often spark
a cycle of vicious action and reaction. While there were FLN-sponsored
terrorist incidents in France, it was the ordinary people of
Algeria (white, Arab and native) who paid disproportionately with
their lives and limbs. As with most wars of the 20th century, the
great majority of casualties in the war were civilian.
29. The Call Up
Bonjour M. Bidasse: Move any number of French Police from Out
of Play to Available; subtract Commitment = 1/3 of total moved
(round down).
Effective Threats: Until Propaganda Round, Train places no more
than 2 cubes per space.
FLN MOMENTUM
Background: “Bidasse” is French military slang for a conscript
recruit or “draftie”. A more polite term is “les appeles” or “those
who have been called”. Over 1.25 million Frenchmen served twoyear
terms in Algeria, most of them as sector troops.
Tip: This card can precede or follow the “Mobilization” Pivotal
Event (#64) to make forces available for use in Algeria.
30. Change in Tactics
Remove any 1 Capability marker that is in effect. That Capability
no longer applies.
Background: Measures and countermeasures are an enduring aspect
of insurgency, and so not all tactical or technical innovations
maintain their battlefield impact for long.
31. Intimidation
Empty Threat: Until Propaganda Round, Terror places marker but
does not set space to Neutral.
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
Persuasive donation drive: Add FLN Resources equal to the number
indicated by marker in France Track.
Background: The FLN was not shy about leaning on Algerian
civilians, either in country or working in France, to support the
movement materially or to refrain from doing anything that would
help the French.
32. Taleb the Bomb-maker
FLN CAPABILITY
Amateurs: Terror in City requires Activation of 2 Underground
Guerrillas.
Effective: Terror in City costs 0 Resources.
Background: Abderrahmane Taleb (pictured) was a chemistry
student who became an explosives expert for the FLN, and built
many bombs for the insurgents during the Battle of Algiers. He was
captured in June 1957 and executed in April 1958.
A set of markers has been provided for you to place in the 3 City
spaces as a reminder of the Capability’s effects.


33. Overkill
FLN CAPABILITY
Let God sort ‘em out: Neutralize removes up to 4 pieces (still
maximum 2 spaces).
Revenge! After Assault, FLN may place 1 Guerrilla in any 1 of the
Assault spaces from Available.
Background: The French military forces enjoyed absolute superiority
in firepower and were willing to use it, even though one clumsy
application could undo months or years of good local relations.
34. Elections
Integrationist mandate: +1 Commitment or set 1 non-Terrorized
Neutral space to Support.
Voter Suppression: Set 1 Sector to Neutral.
Background: From 1947 to 1956 the Algerian Assembly was established
to serve as an elected governing body. Half of the members
were elected by the 9 million Muslims in Algeria, and the other half
were elected from among the 1.1 million non-Muslims. Because of
this imbalance, and the way in which local elections were rigged to
select members, Governor-General Lacoste dissolved the Assembly
in 1956; it would be replaced later by a system of territorial
assemblies.
In 1958, for the first time, Muslims, including Muslim women,
were included on the electoral rolls so they could also vote in the
referendum on a new constitution for France in September, and then
again in legislative elections in November. The FLN violently discouraged
Muslim participation in the referendum and the elections
since it diminished its role as spokesman for Algerian nationalism,
and recognized it as a play for the sympathies of Muslims who
were tired of the violence. As it turned out, de Gaulle got significant
mandates in both France and Algeria for the new constitution and
many “integrationist” candidates were elected.
35. Napalm
GOVERNMENT CAPABILITY
Effective: Remove 1 Guerrilla per Assaulting cube in Mountain
spaces.
Scorch the Countryside: Each Assault space costs 3 Resources.
Background: The French forces had complete air superiority
during the war, and became very skilled in coordinating air-ground
operations. Napalm proved very effective as an area weapon against
insurgents hiding in caves and tunnels.
A set of markers has been provided for you to place in the 19 Mountain
spaces as a reminder of the “Effective Napalm” Capability’s
effects.
36. Assassination
Crippling leadership loss: Remove 1 Guerrilla from any space to
Casualties, –1d6 FLN Resources.
Martyr: Add 1 Guerrilla in any space, from Available or Out of Play,
and add +1d6 FLN Resources.
Background: The illustration is of Zoulika Echaib, one of the few
female FLN guerrilla leaders, shortly after her capture in Wilaya IV.
She was executed in October 1957.
37. Integration
Expansion: Free Train in up to 2 selectable spaces.
Same old prejudices: FLN may conduct free Subvert (Underground
Guerrilla not required).
Background: After 1956 the French Army started to integrate
Muslim troops, both conscripts and volunteers, into the colonial
units that had been manned mostly by pieds-noirs. This helped the
problem of keeping these units up to strength, but racial and religious
tensions and the obvious leadership challenges did not greatly
improve unit quality.
38. Economic Crisis in France
Expatriate donations down: –1d6 FLN Resources
Tight Military Budget: –1d6 Government Resources, –1 Commitment.

Background: The price of both keeping the Algerian economy
afloat and fighting the war there was extremely high, even as France
was still trying to rebuild from the damage inflicted during WW II.
39. Retreat into Djebel
Harsh terrain: Select 2 Mountain spaces with no FLN Base, remove
all Guerrillas there to Available.
Caves: Flip all Guerrillas in Mountain spaces Underground.
Background: Aside from the coastal plains, Algeria is a rough, dry
and inhospitable country. The insurgents could always withdraw to
safety in the inland mountain ranges but could not stay there for long.
40. Strategic Movement
Sea Lift: May redistribute up to 6
cubes among any 3 coastal spaces
for free.
Aircraft Offline: Until Propaganda
Round, lower number of Troop Lift
spaces by 1.
FLN MOMENTUM
France deployed naval forces to the
Mediterranean to interdict insurgent
movement of men and supplies along
the coastline. This also allowed them
to shift forces at will.
41. Egypt
Get Out of Cairo: –3 FLN Resources.
Arab Summit: +1d6 FLN Resources.
Background: In late 1958 the FLN moved its headquarters from
Cairo and established a “Provisional Government of Algeria” in
Tunis as a government-in-exile. It was swiftly given diplomatic
recognition as the legitimate government of Algeria by Morocco,
Tunisia and other Arab and African states, as well as the Soviet
Union and its satellite countries.
42. Czech Arms Deal
Intercepted: Subtract FLN Resources = twice the current Border
Zone Status (subtract 2 if Morocco and Tunisia not yet independent)
Arrived safely: +6 FLN Resources.
Background: During 1954-55 the Soviet Union and Egypt negotiated
the purchase of a large amount of Soviet weapons. President
Nasser’s motivation was to court both the US and USSR to get
more aid, while Premier Khrushchev wanted to gain influence in the 
20 

Middle East. The deal raised Arab-Israeli tensions and contributed
to the Suez Crisis the following year. Meanwhile, for the insurgents
in Algeria, obtaining arms and ammunition was a constant problem
and the FLN received large amounts of now-surplus weapons (mostly
WW II vintage small arms) from Egypt.
43. Refugees
Flee to the cities: Place a “+1 Pop” marker in any 2 Cities. Each
such City now has 1 more Population.
Flee the country: The stacking limit for Bases in Morocco and
Tunisia (if independent) is increased to 3 (place 1 “Base” marker
anywhere in each Country to show this).
Background: Over 2 million Algerians were displaced from their
villages during the war. As often happens in irregular wars, many
moved to the cities and large numbers also left the country entirely.
Once established in camps in Morocco and Tunisia, they became a
source of recruits and support for the FLN as well as a burden on
and threat to the stability of the governments of these two countries.
44. Paranoia
Rampant mistrust: Until Propaganda Round, FLN may not March
into a Sector in a different Wilaya (may still cross International
Borders).
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
Trust No One: Flip all Guerrillas Underground.
Background: Even without the activities of the 5th Bureau and other
“false flag” operations, the leaders of the different Wilayas found it
difficult to communicate and plan well with each other, leading to
a chronic lack of trust.
45. Challe Plan
Single HQ control: Until Propaganda Round, Police cubes are
counted as Troops in all Assaults, not just City spaces. Police do
not move in Sweep.
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
Worse Coordination: Until Propaganda Round, Troops and Police
may not combine in Sweep or Assault (count one or the other, not
both).
FLN MOMENTUM
Background: General Maurice Challe commanded the French Air
Force in Algeria from 1955 to 1960. In 1959 he implemented the
Challe Plan, which emphasized mobility, close cooperation and
communication between the sector troops and the intervention units,
and which was designed to keep the insurgent units moving and
separated from their bases and sanctuaries. He was later involved
in the 1961 putsch attempt (see card #66).
46. Moghazni
Rural self-defense: Until Propaganda Round, Government may
Train in any Sector that is at Support and is Government-Controlled;
however, may place only Algerian Police.
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
Force K: Replace up to all Algerian Police in any 1 Sector with an
equal number of Guerrillas.
Background: SAS officers (see card #13) would often raise small
units of militia (25-50 men) in the villages in their areas of responsibility,
as bodyguards or local protection forces.
Force K was an example of a pseudo-guerrilla operation: the French
intelligence service had created, equipped and trained a number of
small units who would operate disguised as insurgents. In the case
of Force K, the unit was entirely infiltrated with actual FLN troops,
who played their role (occasionally presenting dead bodies of dissident
nationalists as insurgents they had killed) but deserted with
all their arms and equipment when the local FLN leader suspected
the jig was up.
47. Third Force
Rally dissident insurgents: Replace up to 3 Guerrillas in 1 Sector
with an equal number of Algerian Police.
Private army mistreats civilians: Set any 1 Sector with Algerian
Police in it to Opposition.
Background: In 1957 Mohammed Bellounis, a former commander
in the MNA, the FLN’s main rival insurgent movement, rallied to
the French with the several hundred guerrillas under his command.
This private army, called the Armee Nationale Populaire Algerienne,
operated in Wilaya VI but treated the local population harshly in its
efforts to find FLN guerrillas. It reached a strength of up to 3,500
but melted away quickly after Bellounis became uncontrollable and
was killed by the French in 1958.
48. Ultras
Freelancers: Remove up to 1 Guerrilla in each City space to Available.
Army suppresses pied-noir hotheads: Remove 1-3 (1d6 halved,
round up, Executor’s choice) Algerian cubes to Available.
Background: Fearful of being abandoned by France and aware of
their likely fate, the pied-noir community harboured a number of
militant groups who were responsible for many acts of violence
either to provoke or take revenge on the Muslim community. Later,
members of these groups would join the OAS (see card #63) and
resist the French government itself.
49. Factional Plot
Plot successful, mass confusion: Remove
half of Guerrillas in Tunisia to
Available (round down).
Plot crushed, organizational realignment:
May redistribute any number
of Guerrillas in Morocco and Tunisia
between these two Countries.
No effect if Morocco and Tunisia are
not yet independent.
Background: Tunisia sheltered most of
the “exterior army” of FLN guerrillas.
Because of the effectiveness of the Morice Line in preventing infiltration
in large numbers, and the ongoing peace talks that would
end the war, thousands of FLN guerrillas and their leaders had time
to sit and plot against their political leadership. Colonel Houari
Boumedienne (pictured on the right), crushed a plot against the
government-in-exile in 1959 and was rewarded for his efforts. He
later held ultimate power when he deposed Ben Bella in a bloodless
coup in 1965, and ruled Algeria until he died in 1978.
50. Bleuite
Self-purge: Activate all Guerrillas in 1 space in Algeria, roll 1d6,
remove 2 Guerrillas to Casualties if roll ≤ number of Guerrillas.


Blowback: Remove a total of 2 Algerian Police from any spaces
to Available.
Background: “Bleuite” (blueness) referred to the 5th Bureau’s practice
of using “turned” insurgents, or false information implying that
some insurgents were double agents (see card #7). A large part of the
FLN infrastructure in Wilaya III was taken apart by the insurgents
themselves in 1958-59 when the commander Amirouche (pictured
on the right) was convinced, based on faked correspondence planted
by the French, that there were traitors in his organization. He purged
his own command network and, on the strength of false confessions
extracted through torture, executed thousands of his own guerrillas.
51. Stripey Hole
Mass arbitrary imprisonment: Activate all Guerrillas in any Sector,
set to Oppose.
Prison break: Place 2 Guerrillas in any 1 Sector, from Available
or Out Of Play.
Background: As was typical of counterinsurgency methods of the
time, the French would often simply arrest all males of a certain
age in a given area, interrogate them, and keep them in prison for
an arbitrary period. The thinking behind this is that some insurgents
would be discovered, and the innocents would be frightened out of
joining the insurgency.
52. Cabinet Shuffle
Ministers change chairs: Executor of Event shifts France Track
marker 1 box left or right.
Background: Until the events of May 1958 brought Charles de
Gaulle back into power, the government of the Fourth Republic of
France was unstable. Presidents and ministers came and went in a
matter of weeks or months.
53. Population Control
ID cards and housing registers: Until Propaganda Round, FLN
Marching into City Activates if more than 2 Government cubes
present.
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
Collective punishment: Set any 1 City to Neutral.
Background: Another practice of Colonel Roger Trinquier (see
card #7) during the Battle of Algiers in 1957 was strict control of
the movements of the civilian population. He reasoned that an accurate
census, identity cards, and extensive information on where
people live and work would be effective in countering infiltration
by insurgents. He also instituted a system of “responsibles”, where a
given person in a block or building had to answer for its inhabitants.
These measures were widely resented by the Muslim population and
“responsibles” were often targeted for assassination by insurgents.
54. Operation 744
Beat the bushes: Executor of Event moves up to 4 French Troops
from any spaces to 1 Mountain Sector. Remove up to 2 FLN pieces
(may be Underground, but Guerrillas before Bases) to Available if
any are there.
Background: Operation 744, executed in March 1956 in Wilaya
III, was one of the first airmobile operations of the Algerian War.
Conceived and executed by Colonel Marcel Bigeard (pictured on
the card), then commanding the 3rd Colonial Parachute Regiment,
the operation was a success. But it also often happened that French
troops would wander the hills for weeks at a time, finding nothing.
Tip: note that if the FLN executes this Event, French troops can be
sent far away to do just that.
55. Development
Infrastructure: Place up to 2 Government Bases anywhere in Algeria
from Available or Out of Play.
Siphoned: FLN +3 Resources.
Background: The French made sporadic efforts to address the
economic and social situation of the Muslim population, but spent
far more money and effort on the military aspects of the conflict.
56. Hardened Attitudes
Plague on both your houses: Until Propaganda Round:
Government may not Train in a Sector without Support. FLN may
not Extort in a Sector without a Base.
DUAL MOMENTUM
Background: As in most insurgencies, the majority of the Muslim
population was caught in the middle and could not be convinced
to overwhelmingly support one side or the other. Note that this
Momentum card has effects on both players.
57. Peace Talks
Play nice, now: Until Propaganda Round: Government may not
Assault. FLN may not Attack.
DUAL MOMENTUM
Background: The illustration is of the FLN delegation to the negotiations
at Evian, France that began in May 1961. Almost a year later,
in March 1962, the two sides declared a ceasefire that formally ended
the war. Note that this Momentum card has effects on both players.
58. Army in Waiting
Save strength against the day: Half
(round down) of Guerrillas in Tunisia
(only) removed to Out of Play.
Strengthen government-in-exile:
Place 1 Base in Morocco or Tunisia
if stacking permits.
Background: No effect if Morocco
and Tunisia are not yet independent.
After the peace negotiations began
in 1961, the FLN had little interest in
expending its armed strength against the Morice Line, when it would
be needed to assert the control of the new government over Algeria.
59. Bandung Conference
Waste of time: –1d6 FLN Resources.
Pledges of support: +1d6 FLN Resources.
Background: The April 1955 international conference of Afro-Asian
nations at Bandung, Indonesia condemned both Soviet and Western
colonialism, and contributed to the creation of the Non-Aligned
Movement. A delegation of the FLN attended as a “guest” and
obtained pledges of financial and material support from several
countries.
22 

60. Soummam Conference
Inter-Wilaya wrangling: Replace up to 2 FLN Bases in any spaces
in Algeria with 1 Guerrilla each. No change in Commitment.
Productive meeting: Place up to 2 FLN Bases in any spaces in
Algeria for free.
This conference of FLN political and military leaders took place in
Wilaya III in August 1956. It was an important event in the development
of the insurgency in that it worked out general agreement
on military structure, tactics, and political issues.
61. Morocco and Tunisia Independent
FLN Pivotal Event—may play if Mobilization has been played.
Morocco and Tunisia are now playable spaces. FLN may now enter
them, Rally and Extort there, etc.. See 1.3.4, 5.1.8. Set Border Zone
Status marker to “0”. From now on, Police in Border Sectors count
as Troops in Assaults (3.2.4).
Background: Legally Morocco and Tunisia were French protectorates,
not colonies, but they were part of the empire nonetheless. In
March 1956 both countries became independent and the French garrisons
left, as they were needed in Algeria and in Europe. Throughout
the rest of the war the FLN would treat these countries as sanctuaries,
operating training and supply bases from their territory.
62. Suez Crisis
FLN Pivotal Event
The Government player removes 1d6
French Troops from map or Available
(his choice). Set them aside. Both
players subtract 6 Resources. The
Troops return in the Redeploy Phase
of the next Propaganda Round, to any
Cities or spaces with friendly Bases
(no cost in Commitment). The FLN
player (only) will receive 6 Resources
in the Resource Phase of the next
Propaganda Round. See 5.1.9.
Background: President Gamel Abdel Nasser’s government gave
political and logistical support to the FLN in its early stages, which
was a factor in France’s decision to join Great Britain in “Operation
MUSKETEER”, the air and naval landings in the Suez Canal
Zone undertaken in October-December 1956. The temporary cost
in Resources to the FLN player reflects the interruption of arms and
supplies coming to him from Egypt, but he will get them back after
the invasion crisis has passed. For his part, the Government player
left his Resources sitting on the beach at Port Said.
63. OAS
FLN Pivotal Event and DUAL
CAPABILITY
May play if Recall de Gaulle is in
play. Cancelled if Recall de Gaulle
is cancelled. See 5.1.7, 5.3.1.
Either player may use this Capability
any time in place of any Special
Activity. Place 1 Terror marker in
any non-Terrorized Populated space
in Algeria (set space to Neutral); -
Commitment = Population Value of
space; - FLN Resources = twice the
Population Value of space.
Background: The Organization de l’ Armee Secrete (OAS) was
formed at the end of 1960 by right-wing military officers and members
of “ultra” pied-noir groups. For the final two years of the war
the OAS was continuously active in both Algeria and France. They
carried out selective assassinations and bombings to either silence
people and organizations seeking progress in the peace negotiations,
and/or to provoke violent reactions from the FLN to derail these same
negotiations. Their actions in France, including several attempts to
kill de Gaulle, brought them into conflict with the French security
agencies and further alienated the French civilian population.
The cost in Commitment and FLN Resources reflects the effects of
one organization provoking the other, and the reflexive retaliation
that ensues. Note rule 1.8: If a player does not have sufficient Resources
or Commitment to pay for a given action or choice, they
may not perform it. However, if required to lose Resources or Commitment
beyond 0 (zero) because of the other player’s actions, they
may not have a “deficit” inflicted on them—the index is lowered to
0 and the excess is ignored.
64. Mobilization
Government Pivotal Event
May play if Oppose + Bases ≥ 15.
Move any number of pieces from Out of Play to Available, up to
the one-half the current Commitment level (round up), at no cost in
Commitment. Government may now Resettle Pop 1 Sectors (4.2.1).
Background: France was unable and unwilling to commit large
numbers of troops to Algeria at the beginning of the violence in late
1954, as they were still trying to extricate themselves from Indochina.
Also, the FLN revolt was treated at first as criminal activity
to be dealt with by the police. But by the fall of 1955 the growing
influence of the FLN, and the frequency and violence of insurgent
operations, led the French government to mobilize new drafts of
reservists for service in Algeria. In the end, over 1.25 million conscripts
from metropolitan France served two-year terms in Algeria,
most of them as “sector troops”.
65. Recall De Gaulle
Government Pivotal Event. May
play if Coup d’Etat has been played.
See 5.1.5, 5.1.7., 6.2.1. Allows play
of OAS Pivotal Event. Government
may now also Train in any Pop 1+
space with Government control
and Troops and Police (Pacify still
only 1 space per card and 1 shift per
Pacify). Each Resource Phase: Gov’t
Resources increased by Commitment
and total Support; French Casualties
do not affect Commitment. This card
remains in effect for the rest of the game unless cancelled by Coup
d’Etat Pivotal Event.
Background: To conclude a complex chain of events in the spring
of 1958, including a revolt in Algiers by pieds-noirs, a conspiracy
of senior generals, a threatened coup d’etat in Paris and the collapse
of the Fourth Republic, Charles de Gaulle re-emerged from retirement
and became Prime Minister of France in June 1958. De Gaulle
was interested in pursuing some form of compromise end-state for
Algeria between colony and total independence that would respect
the wishes of the Muslim majority and protect both the pieds-noirs, 
many of whose families had lived in Algeria for over a century, and
French commercial and strategic interests. This made him enemies.
66. Coup d’etat
Government Pivotal Event. May play once per Campaign; retain
this card. See 5.1.5.
Each player rolls 1d6.
If Government rolls higher: Recall de Gaulle and/or OAS Events
cancelled if in play; add Commitment = lower of the 2 die rolls; add
Resources = sum of the 2 rolls.
If FLN rolls higher: choice of: remove Troops = lower of the 2 die
rolls from map or Available to Out of Play (FLN may choose, no
change in Commitment); OR subtract Commitment = lower of the
2 die rolls.
If tied, no change (but card has been played).
Background: There were three major instances during the Algerian
War where the French Army intervened in politics. As frustration
grew in 1957-58, elements in the Army leadership and pied-noir
community decided that Charles de Gaulle would be the man to
prosecute the war as vigorously as they wanted. “Operation Resurrection”,
a military revolt in May 1958 featuring an airborne landing
and intervention by armored units in Paris, got as far as the bloodless
seizure of Corsica by several French paratroop regiments before the
government collapsed and de Gaulle assumed power. As de Gaulle
attempted to engage the FLN in peace negotiations throughout 1960,
the pieds-noirs and the elite troops of the intervention forces, particularly
the paratroop regiments, felt betrayed by the man they had
placed in power to help them win the war. In January 1960 the “Week
of the Barricades” began as a pied-noir revolt in Algiers; the revolt
was supposed to spread to the military and Paris itself but de Gaulle
defused the situation through his personal influence. By the end of
1960 some leaders of the revolt formed the OAS, which would in
the following years make multiple attempts to assassinate de Gaulle.
In April 1961 the “General’s Putsch” seized power in Algiers, and
it was feared that there would be a military-wide revolt. Again, de
Gaulle saved the situation by appearing on radio and television to
appeal to the French nation; the steam
went out of the rebellion and several
elite units were disbanded.
