1. Armored Cars GMDS
In rebel service: 26July or DR free Marches
into a space and free Ambushes there (even
if Active).
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
Delivered: Until Propaganda, before Assault, move Troops to Assault spaces from
other spaces.
The Batista regime was desperate to obtain
all types of heavy weapons, including armored cars, which the US was reluctant to
send. Many other weapons found their way
into the hands of the rebels.
2. Guantánamo Bay GMDS
INSURGENT CAPABILITY
Base personnel targeted: 26July may Kidnap
in Sierra Maestra as if City.
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
US airfield: Until Propaganda, Air Strike
removes 2 pieces and allowed even if Embargoed.
The American base was a benefit both to the
Batista government as a source of air assets
and intelligence and to the 26 July Movement as a source of hostages (for ransom
and political leverage).
3. Eulogio Cantillo GMSD
General seals truce: Select a space with
Troops. A Faction free Marches all its Guerrillas out, then flips them Underground.
Dictator backs general’s offensive: Select
a Province or City with Troops. They free
Sweep in place, then free Assault.
Cantillo was one of Batista’s most able commanders, but on one memorable occasion
allowed Castro’s trapped forces to escape.
Cantillo’s motives for this have been a source
of speculation for historians.
4. S.I.M. GMSD
Word of torture: Remove Support from a
space with no Police.
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
Military intelligence gleans leads: Until
next Propaganda, Police Sweep and Assault
as if Troops.
Batista’s secret police were effective agents
of counterinsurgency, but were also known
for torture and political murders. Insurgents’
worst fear was being handed over to the
S.I.M..
5. Rolando Masferrer GDMS
Brutal commander: Set a Province with
Troops and 1 adjacent Province to Passive
Opposition.
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
Paramilitaries: Sweep may free Assault 1
space as its Special Activity (until Propaganda).
A former communist who fought in the
Spanish Civil War, Masferrer commanded
Los Tigres, a paramilitary army supporting
Batista. His troops and tactics were feared
by Castro and Guevara. After the revolution,
he fled to Miami, where he was assassinated
in 1975.
6. Sánchez Mosquera GDMS
Popular colonel wounded: Remove all
Troops from a Mountain space (to available).
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
Effective army commander: Until next Propaganda, Assault treats Mountain as City.
A regular army officer who had some success
with counterinsurgency tactics against the
26July in the Sierra Maestra.
7. Election GDSM
Postponed! Rebel ranks grow: Place 1 Guerrilla in each City.
Scheduled! Batista bows to US pressure: Set
a City to Neutral. Aid +10
Batista had long resisted the US call for
elections, and the overdue election finally
took place in November 1958 with Batista’s
hand-picked successor Andrés Rivero
Agüero declared (fraudulently) the winner.
The election was essentially meaningless as
Castro had declared a boycott and Batista
was not prepared to hand over power.
8. General Strike GDSM
Widespread disruption: In each City, shift
1 level toward Neutral and place any 1
Guerrilla.
Strike fails, shops open: Set a City to Active
Support and Activate all Guerrillas there.
Open any 1 closed Casino.
Fidel’s biggest blunder was undoubtedly the
General Strike of April 1958. Poorly planned
and thwarted by Batista’s trade union allies, the strike lead the 26July leadership to
distrust the leaders of their urban movement
(llano).
9. Coup GSMD
Batista ousted!: Shift all Govt Control
spaces 1 level toward Neutral. US Alliance
up 1 box.
US-backed plot discovered: Activate and
free Assault all DR pieces in Cities with
cubes. US Alliance down 1 box.
The US Government had the ability to
trigger a coup in Cuba, but no documents
have emerged to indicate that one was ever
planned, so this entire event is a bit of alternative history.
10. MAP GSMD
Arms shipment stolen: Replace a cube with
any 2 Guerrillas.
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
US training: Until Propaganda, Govt may
accompany LimOps with a free Special
Activity.
The MAP, Military Assistance Program,
was a key element of US aid and many of
the best Cuban troops were trained by the
United States. Many of those troops were
kept close to Havana, however, so few troops
or heavy weapons were committed to the
insurgent campaign.
11. Batista Flees GSDM
US forces dictator out: Government Resources –10. Select and remove a die roll of Troops.
US Alliance 1 box up. Aid +10. Government
Redeploys as in Propaganda round.
Batista’s sudden departure on January 1,
1959 took almost everyone, including many
close to the dictator, by surprise. As it transpired, its effect on the Cuban military was
devastating, and resistance crumbled almost
immediately.
12. BRAC GSDM
Anti-subversion agency: Remove any 2
Guerrillas.
CIA trains political police: Place 1 Police
anywhere. Add lesser of +6 or Aid to Government Resources.


BRAC, Buró de Represión de las Actividades Comunistas, was a force supposedly
dedicated to fighting Communism, but the
fascade fooled no one, including the US
State Department. Batista failed almost
completely in his attempts to convince the
US that the insurgents were communists.
13. El Che MGDS
INSURGENT CAPABILITY
Inspired military leader: The first group of
Guerrillas to move on each 26July March
operation flips Underground
Despite Guevara’s failures as a leader of
later insurgencies in the Congo and Bolivia,
his talent for inspired leadership during the
Cuban Revolution cannot be questioned. He
was a fearless soldier, talented tactician, and
outstanding instructor who turned often illiterate recruits into hardened guerrillas.
14. Operation Fisherman MGDS
2nd invasion: Place a 26July Base and Guerrilla in Pinar del Río.
Locals resent being drawn in: Shift Pinar del
Río 2 levels toward Active Support.
Operation Fisherman was an M26 plan to
open another front in the guerrilla war with
a landing at the far end of the island, in Pinar
del Río. A few historians believe that it may
have been only a ruse to keep Government
forces pinned down, but the 26 July did
have the resources to make such an operation work.
15. Come Comrades! MGSD
Communist recruits: Place 3 26July Guerrillas anywhere.
Soviet influence suspected: Add lesser of
Aid or +10 to Government Resources. Then
Aid +5.
Fidel insisted that the Movement of 26 July
did not accept communists, but in reality
many of the guerrillas had been members
of the communist party and were actively
recruited.
16. Larrazábal MGSD
Venezuelan junta supplies arms: Place a
26July Base where there is a 26July piece.
Caracas cuts off shipments: Remove one
26July Base. 26July Resources –3.
Wolfgang Larrazábal, Interim President of
Venezuela in 1958, provided vital arms,
including M-1 Garand rifles, Browning
Automatic Rifles, and hand grenades to the
guerrillas in the Sierra Maestra. He died in
2003 at 91.
17. Alberto Bayo MDGS
Vet trains guerrillas: 26July or DR free Rallies in each space it has a Base (as if spaces
Neutral).
Mexico blocks training by Cuban expat: All
26July Guerrillas Active. 26July Ineligible
through next card.
Alberto Bayo was a Cuban who had served
with the Republicans in the Spanish Civil
War and had settled in Mexico, where he
met Fidel, Raúl, and Che. He helped trained
the core of the M26 guerrillas who would
embark on the Granma.
18. Pact of Caracas MDGS
INSURGENT CAPABILITY
No 26July or DR Ops or Special Activities
that remove the other’s pieces or affect
placed Opposition. If same player, mutual
transfers allowed. If either removes 2 of its
Bases at once, cancel Capability. Executing
Faction stays Eligible for next card.
The 1958 Pact of Caracas was an important
agreement that united all insurgents fighting
against Batista, setting aside their differences
in order to work together toward the overthrow of the dictator. The Pact essentially
papered over fundamental differences in
visions for the future of Cuba.
19. Sierra Maestra Manifesto
MDSG
Fidel disdains elections or compromise: In
card Faction order, each Faction may place
2 non-Casino pieces in a space where they
already have a piece. Executing Faction
stays Eligible.
The Manifesto rejected any political compromise and committed the insurgents the
overthrow of the government. Essentially an
escalation of the conflict, it may have also
been Fidel’s best piece of rhetoric.
20. The Twelve MDSG
Tale of survivors inspires movement: A
Faction free Marches then free Rallies at a
March destination.
Granma travail presages supply challenge:
Remove 1/2 rounded up of any Guerrillas
from the space with the most Guerrillas.
Myth-making was an important tool for the
26 July Movement. Borrowing religious
imagery to appeal to the poor and illiterate, the story of the tiny band of guerrillas
triumphing against a powerful foe connected
with the most disaffected Cubans.
21. Fangio MSGD
26July seizes racer: Shift a City 1 level toward Active Opposition, 2 levels if a 26July
piece is there.
Famous driver popularizes Cuba: In 2 spaces with any Casinos, open a closed Casino or
place 1 Cash with a Guerrilla or cube.
Juan Manuel Fangio was perhaps the greatest
Formula One driver in history. Kidnapped
by insurgents before a race, Fangio was
well-treated and praised his captors upon his
release. The incident was a major embarrassment for Batista.
22. Raúl MSGD
INSURGENT CAPABILITY
Younger Castro an ace: 26July may reroll
each Attack or Kidnap.
GOVERNMENT MOMENTUM
US hostage-taking backfires: Until Propaganda, add to Aid twice any Resources
from Kidnap.
A committed communist, the younger Castro influenced both 26July strategy and his
brother’s politics. His kidnapping campaign
gave the movement vital leverage with the
United States.
23. Radio Rebelde MSDG
Clandestine radio reaches masses: Shift 2
Provinces each 1 level toward Active Opposition.
Transmitter pinpointed: Remove a 26July
Base from a Province.
The use of radio propaganda was an important tool for the insurgents, who articulated
their vision better than the Government
could manage.
24. Vilma Espín MSDG
Revolutionary interlocutor: Set Sierra
Maestra or an adjacent space to Active Opposition.
Raúl’s fiancé betrays urban guerrilla: Remove all 26July pieces from a City other
than Havana.
Raúl’s fiancé Vilma Espín Guillois was a
talented organizer and recruiter. There is circumstantial evidence that she was involved
in the death of 26July organizer (and Castro
rival) Frank País.
25. Escapade DGMS
Yacht brings fighters: Place a DR Guerrilla
and Base in either Camagüey Province or
Oriente
Resupply yacht intercepted: Remove a Directorio Base.
Most of the arms received by the Directorio
came by boat from Miami, periodically interdicted by the US and Cuban governments.
The most famous shipment came aboard the
yacht Escapade.
34 Cuba Libre — PLAYBOOK

26. Rodríguez Loeches DGMS
DR Leader: DR places 1 Guerrilla anywhere
and free Marches to, Rallies, or Ambushes
there.
Inefficient administrator: Remove 1 DR
Guerrilla. DR Resources –5
Rodríguez Loeches, an important leader in
the Directorio, was not comfortable in the
mountains of the Escambray, but preferred
the life of an urban guerrilla.
27. Echeverría DGSM
Near-miss attempt on dictator’s life: Place 2
DR Guerrillas anywhere. Havana to Neutral.
DR to Eligible.
Popular revolutionary dies in his “hit at the
top”: Remove the 2 DR pieces closest to
Havana. DR Resources –3.
José Antonio Echeverría was the inspirational leader of the Federation of University
Students and founding member of the Revolutionary Directorate. He died on March 13,
1957 during the failed attempt to assassinate
Batista, topple the Government, and seize
power. Without Echeverría, the Directorio
lacked direction and the inspirational leadership that Fidel Castro brought to the 26 July
movement.
28. Morgan DGSM
INSURGENT CAPABILITY
US Comandante: DR Guerrillas may March
2 adjacent spaces.
Backlash against Yanqui adventurer: Set a
space with a DR Guerrilla to Active Support
A remarkable personality, William Alexander Morgan was drawn into the Cuban Revolution and was instrumental in the success
of the rebels in the Escambray mountains of
Las Villas. Executed by Castro in 1961 for
spying (probably false) and plotting against
him (probably true).
29. Fauré Chomón DMGS
Students take to the field: DR or 26July places a Base and 2 Guerrillas in Las Villas.
Student loyalties shift: Remove a DR piece
or replace it with its 26July counterpart.
Fauré Chomón became the leader of the
Revolutionary Directorate after the death
of Echaverría. Chomón was successful in
keeping the organization active, and the
threat it posed probably kept many troops out
of the battles in the Sierra Maestra. Chomón
brought many recruits into the Escambray,
but his split with Gutiérrez-Menoyo cost
the DR one of its best leaders and many of
its most seasoned guerrillas. He was also a
signatory of the Pact of Miami.
30. The Guerrilla Life DMGS
INSURGENT CAPABILITY
Hardships harden 26July fighters: All 26July
Rallies flip Guerrillas Underground, even
if placing.
Hardships harden student revolutionaries:
Flip all DR Guerrillas Underground. Place
1 DR Guerrilla in a City.
The guerrillas of the 26 July and other factions suffered many deprivations, whether
they were starving in the mountains or
being hunted by secret police in the cities.
Those who adapted to the life were nearly
impossible for the Government to overcome,
despite the seemingly overwhelming advantage in men and material committed against
the insurgents.
31. Escopeteros DMSG
Locals start their own revolution: Place any
non-Casino Base and any 1 Guerrilla into a
Mountain.
Traditionalist countryside rejects rebellion:
Shift a Mountain space 1 level toward Active Support.
Many local peasants wanted to join the
insurgents, but both the Directorio and the
26 July were wary of taking them into their
ranks. The Government often attempted to
infiltrate the guerrilla camps with these new
recruits, but even if they weren’t informers
the peasants often were more of a burden to
the insurgents than a benefit. Still, the supply
of recruits used to hard work and familiar
with local terrain were of great benefit.
32. Resistencia Cívica DMSG
Urban movement backs Castro: In a City,
replace all Directorio pieces with 26July
counterparts.
Movement splits with Castro: In a City,
replace all 26July pieces with Directorio
counterparts.
El Movimiento de Resistencia Cívica was
an important group opposing Batista, particularly in Havana. Its support for the rural
insurgents wavered over the course of the
war, but its goals were more in line with the
moderate Directorio.
33. Carlos Prío DSGM
Ex-president funnels funds: +5 DR or +5
26July Resources.
Return from exile: Select a space without
Govt Control. Place a DR Base there and
set it to Neutral.
Carlos Prío Socarrás was President of Cuba
from 1948-52 (when he was ousted in a
coup by Batista). Prio supported insurgent
groups including the 26 July. He was urged
to return to Cuba during the Revolution, but
preferred to keep supporting the insurgents
from a distance.
34. US Speaking Tour DSGM
Expatriates invest: An Insurgent Faction
adds a die roll in Resources. Each other
adds +2.
An embarrassment: Add the lesser of +8
or Aid to Government Resources. Then
Aid +8.
The proximity of Cuba to the exile communities in Miami and New York created opportunities for insurgent groups to raise funds
and tell their stories directly to the people.
Fidel made visits to the US just prior to the
Revolution as well as shortly afterward.
35. Defections DSMG
Disillusioned fighters: In a space already occupied by your pieces and those of an enemy,
replace 2 of the enemy’s Guerrillas or cubes
with your Guerrillas or cubes.
Every faction in the conflict suffered from
defections, including the Syndicate, which
lost employees to the insurgency and to
the Government. More valuable than the
manpower was the intelligence gained from
these defections.
36. Eloy Gutiérrez Menoyo DSMG
Inspiring DR leader: Replace a non-DR nonCasino piece within 1 space of Las Villas
with 2 DR Guerrillas.
Commander fractious: Replace a Directorio
Guerrilla with a non-Directorio Guerrilla.
Eloy Gutiérrez-Menoyo led the Segundo
Frente Nacional del Escambray after he
broke with Chomón over leadership of the
Revolutionary Directorate in the Escambray.
Imprisoned for 22 years after the Revolution,
he was embraced by the exile community,
then vilified when he returned to Cuba. He
died in 2012.
37. Herbert Matthews SGMD
NYTimes refutes Fidel’s death: 26July Resources +5. Aid -6.
Fidel’s survival spurs support to counterweights: Aid +10. Directorio Resources +3.
Syndicate Resources +5.
Herbert Matthews, a New York Times reporter, interviewed Fidel Castro in early 1957
only a few weeks after Batista had claimed
that Castro had been killed in battle. The
interview was a massive publicity coup for
the 26 July Movement and an equal public
relations nightmare for Batista and his supporters in the US Government.


38. Meyer Lansky SGMD
Wheeler dealer: Within a space, transfer any
Cash among any Guerrillas or cubes.
Master mobster: Syndicate relocates any
Casinos anywhere (within stacking). All
Casinos open.
Meyer Lansky, a Polish Jew, became one of
the most remarkable figures in the American
Mafia. Because of his ethnicity, he could not
rise in the ranks of the Syndicate, but his
talents as a businessman and expert in the
business of casino gambling made him a
natural to run the Mob’s operation in Cuba.
Lansky was a major supporter of Batista, and
much of the skim from the casinos found
its way into Batista’s pockets and funded
counterinsurgency efforts.
39. Turismo SGDM
“Ugly American”: Support 1 level toward
Neutral each Casino space.
Police “protection” for tourists: Govt and
Syndicate each add +3 Resources per space
with open Casino and Police
The strong current of Anti-Americanism in
Cuba was fueled by the number of American
tourists who flocked to Cuba. The tourists’
appetite for liquor, gambling, wild entertainment, and prostitutes offended the conservative population. Elaborate giveaways to
the Cuban population did little to win their
support.
40. Ambassador Smith SGDM
Havana advocate ignored in US: Shift US
Alliance 1 box down (leave Aid the same).
Blindly backing dictator: Shift US Alliance 1
box up. Aid +9. Then add lesser of +9 or half
Aid (round down) to Syndicate Resources.
Earl Smith was a businessman with investments in Cuba who became the US Ambassador in 1957 even though he did not
speak Spanish. Smith pushed constantly for
increased military aid to Batista and believed
that the 26 July Movement was a Communist
insurgency. He came to believe that those
who opposed him in the State Department
were friendly to Communism.
41. Fat Butcher SMGD
Casino-man Nicholas di Costanzo draws US
heat: Close 1 Casino or reduce Aid -8.
Mob enforcer: Syndicate free Ambushes
with 1 of its Underground Guerrillas and
opens 1 closed Casino.
Nicholas di Costanzo was one a group of
mobsters brought in to run the Syndicate’s
operations in Cuba. He was noted as an
intimidating figure who kept rigid order at
the Capri.
42. Llano SMGD
Slums to arms: Place a 26July Base and any
Guerrilla in a City.
Urban poor indifferent, eager for work:
Select a City. Remove any Opposition there
and place an open Casino
The Llano (literally “a plain or flat space”)
was a term for the Cuban urban underground.
While the popular myth of the Cuban
Revolution emphasized the victory of Fidel’s
guerrillas in the mountains, recent scholarship has emphasized the importance of the
urban revolution in Cuba. The poor and
middle class provided both urban guerrillas
and material aid to the insurgent groups in
rural areas.
43. Mafia Offensive SMDG
Mob helps rebels: 26July or DR executes a
free LimOp, treating 1 Syndicate piece as
that Faction’s piece.
INSURGENT CAPABILITY
Hitmen: Syndicate may Assassinate as if DR,
but regardless of Police.
The Syndicate never took an active role
militarily in the Cuban Revolution, but
there are stories of confrontations between
mobsters and guerrillas that ended short of
violence. The Syndicate actively recruited
servicemen from both the Korean War and
World War Two, so would have had a reserve
of trained men.
44. Rebel Air Force SMDG
Captured aircraft shocks troops: A 26July or
DR Guerrilla (Active or not) free Ambushes
Government forces. Remove Bases first.
Rebels purchase but cannot operate aircraft:
Select 26July or DR and transfer 1 die roll
of their Resources to Syndicate.
The resourcefulness of the 26 July Movement is well demonstrated by the acquisition of a number of aircraft which were
used by the insurgents in support of ground
operations and to harass the Cuban Army
Air Force.
45. Anastasia SDGM
Rival muscles into Cuba: Close all Casinos
in Havana. Syndicate Resources -5.
Lansky rival whacked in New York: Syndicate Resources +10.
The infamous head of Murder, Inc. was unhappy with his cut of the Cuban operation.
Other members of the Syndicate in Cuba
wanted no part of the volatile Albert Anastasia, and were quite happy with Lansky’s
low key management of the casino operation.
Whether any members of the group participated in or ordered the hit on Anastasia in the
barbershop of the Park Sheraton Hotel is not
known, but Anastasia’s death meant operations in Cuba would continue smoothly.
46. Sinatra SDGM
Over-priced star: Syndicate Resources -6.
Frankie’s show: Place an open Casino in
Havana regardless of stacking. Place 1 Cash
with Police there.
Sinatra loved booze, women, and mobsters
and there was no shortage of any of those in
Havana. He enjoyed Havana so much that he
considered making it his permanent home, at
one point planning a live television program
from a casino in Havana.
47. Pact of Miami SDMG
Surprise for dictator and rebels: Remove
2 Guerrillas. Govt Ineligible through next
card.
Agreement causes confusion: 26July and
Directorio each lose –3 Resources and are
Ineligible through next card.
The Pact of Miami probably surprised everyone from the Cuban Government to Fidel
Castro (although several members of the 26
July Movement were signatories). While apparently ceding leadership of the insurrection
to Castro, it also confused matters by forcing
him into an alliance with the Autenticos and
Ortodoxos political parties. In the end, it was
generally ignored as the realities of the war
dictated the future leadership of Cuba.
48. Santo Trafficante, Jr SDMG
Feud with Lansky: Syndicate Resources –10.
All Syndicate Guerrillas to Active.
INSURGENT CAPABILITY
Old-time mobster: Any Underground Syndicate Guerrillas block Skim (6.2.3).
Trafficante despite being the subject of
multiple biographies and the focus of many
FBI investigations, remains something of
a mystery. Trafficante’s expertise in gambling (his family made its name in Tampa
running the bolita, a lottery popular with
Cuban exiles) made him an important figure
in the Havana Mafia. Trafficante became
disillusioned with Batista and tried to work
with Castro even after the Revolution had
ended. Although imprisoned by Castro, he
continued to hope that he would be allowed
to continue his casino operations. He was
charged with narcotics trafficking (which
is coincidentally the meaning of his name)
and later deported. Rumors of Trafficante’s
involvement in the assassination of President
Kennedy persisted (occasionally encouraged
by Trafficante himself). He died in 1987.