1. ISR CTGW
COALITION CAPABILITIES
Overhead intel: Each Coalition Sweep Op, Coalition may Activate
another 3 Guerrillas in any 1 space.
Competition for targeting assets: Air Strike may not accompany
Sweep.
The Coalition had technological superiority over the insurgents,
especially in the air. Reconnaissance and surveillance was carried
out by assets ranging from a 4-pound airplane tossed in the air by a
soldier to satellites; but those assets were not universally available,
nor universally effective.
2. Predators CTGW
COALITION CAPABILITIES
Sanctuary denied: In 1 space
per Air Strike, 1 target piece
may be Under-ground and ignored for Islamabad.
Collateral damage: Each Air
Strike space adds +1 Taliban
Resource.
The Predator Unmanned Aerial
Vehicle (UAV) was used by the
Coalition in Afghanistan from
the very beginning of hostilities
in 2001. It could spend up to 24
hours in the air, flying at altitudes of up to 26,000 feet. Some models were unarmed and carried only TV cameras, radar and a laser
designator; others also carried Hellfire guided missiles. In either
case they were controlled by pilots sitting over 7,000 miles away,
watching on screens in trailers at Air Force bases across the United
States. (Singer, p. 32-35)
3. Reapers CTGW
COALITION CAPABILITIES
Drone war: Air Strikes may remove up to 2 Active Guerrillas (or 1
Base last) per space.
Controversy: Air Strikes affect only 1 space.
After the Predator came the Reaper UAV, first fielded in Afghanistan in 2009. It was bigger, faster, and more heavily armed than the
Predator. Still faster, stealthier, and more heavily armed models were
being developed. (Singer, p. 116)
4. #2 Is Dead CTWG
Leadership loss: Remove a Taliban piece from Pakistan. Subtract a
die roll from Taliban Resources.
Martyr: Place a Taliban piece in Pakistan. Add a die roll to Taliban
Resources
For every #1 insurgent leader, there is a #2 – and several of these
were eliminated in Afghanistan or Pakistan by drone strikes (because
there is always a #3 to take #2’s place). Sometimes these drone strikes
missed their mark but were still taken as malicious acts, further
intensifying feeling against the Coalition. (Singer, p.399)
5. Aerostats CTWG
COALITION CAPABILITIES
Eye in the Sky: Taliban March costs +1 extra Resource per Space,
including LoCs.
Bomb kites and weather: Taliban March flips 1 Active Guerrilla
Underground per card.
Lightweight cameras and radars could be carried aloft by tethered
balloons, to carry out constant surveillance of roads, passes, defiles
or unobservable ground near a Coalition base or fighting position.
(JIEDDO website)
6. US-Pakistan Talks CTWG
Feathers smoothed: Shift Islamabad 2 boxes toward Hostility.
Frenemies: Shift Islamabad 2 boxes toward Sponsorship.
There were many meetings between American and Pakistani government officials for them to bring pressure on the Taliban’s sanctuary
in the Federally Administrated Tribal Areas (FATA) that form part
of Pakistan’s border with Afghanistan. The Government of Pakistan,
struggling simultaneously with religious extremism, unstable politics, a weak economy, poverty, unemployment, regional separatism,
domestic terrorism, constant tension with India, and a desire to exert
influence on Afghanistan, was unable to muster more than token
crackdowns on Taliban fighters and occasional cooperation with
Coalition forces at border crossing points. (Giustozzi p. 21-28; US
DIA “(New) Great Game”)
7. Find Fix Finish CGTW
COALITION CAPABILITIES
Net-centric warfare: 1 piece removed each Coalition Assault space
may be Underground.
Ignorance of human terrain: Assault to remove any Bases must
include any Govt cube.
The concept of “network-centric warfare” seemed to be borne out
in the early stages of the war in Afghanistan, when small groups
or even individual Special Forces operators could access volumes
of data in near real time, allowing them to move quickly and cause
maximum disruption to the enemy. However, the best satellite photos
in the world will not replace the need for the ability to talk to and
learn from the “human terrain” through which troops are moving.
(Singer, p.187-191)
8. SEAL Team 6 CGTW
Taliban ally loses leader: Remove a Taliban piece from
Pakistan. Taliban Resources -6.
Sovereignty violated: Shift
Islamabad 2 boxes toward
Sponsorship
On May 2, 2011, members of
the United States Naval Special
Warfare Development Group
raided Osama bin Laden’s compound in Abbottabad, Pakistan
and killed him. His elimination
was the fulfillment of a major 


objective of the “Global War on Terror”, and a blow to al-Qaeda’s
organizational effectiveness. Items seized in the raid yielded significant intelligence on the status of the organization. The Pakistani
Government, which had not been informed of the raid, protested the
American incursion.
9. Special Forces CGTW
Raids: Coalition removes 2 Insurgent pieces from within 1 space
of its Troops.
Incursion suspected: If Coalition adjacent to Pashtun Pakistan, shift
Islamabad 2 boxes toward Sponsorship.
The Durand Line which forms the border between Afghanistan and
Pakistan is indistinct in many places, and it happened that Coalition
Special Operations Forces troops “accidentally on purpose” wandered across it to observe insurgent camps and hit them with UAV
or other air strikes. The Pakistani Government was understandably
sensitive about these events.
10. Partnering Policy CGWT
Close knit: Coalition or Government executes any 2 free Limited
Operations.
Unraveled: Until Propaganda, no Coalition Operations that would
spend Govt Resources.
MOMENTUM
Coalition trainers and advisors worked as mentors to the Afghan
National Army (ANA) and Police (ANP) from their re-creation
in 2002. As progressively larger numbers of recruits joined, and
larger units formed and deployed, Afghan units would operate in
partnership with attached “enabler training teams” and jointly with
complete Coalition units. In 2009, with the arrival of General Stanley
McChrystal as Commander of the International Security Assistance
Force, these temporary arrangements gave way to a policy of “embedded partnering”, wherein Afghan and Coalition units were to live
at and operate from the same bases, and match their command and
operational procedures and organizations as completely as possible.
By 2012, over 90% of ANA units were partnered with NATO units
(Brookings Afghanistan Index). However, there remained large gaps
in cultural understanding, language, levels of logistical support and
technical competence, and basic trust that make this desirable goal
difficult to reach. (Donahue, p. 96; US DoD Report on Progress,
p. 36-39)
11. Strategic Release CGWT
Executing Faction remains Eligible. Until Propaganda, each Assault
rolls a die for each space.
1-4 Detainees turned: Replace each piece removed with a Govt
cube.
5-6 Recidivism: Removed Guerrillas move to owner’s Base if possible.
MOMENTUM
For some time, the United States operated the Strategic Release
Program, under which a limited number of influential insurgent commanders are paroled from detention, in exchange for information or
a commitment to pursue reconciliation with the Government, and on
the condition that they would not take up arms again. (Sieff)
12. Village Stability Operations CGWT
COALITION CAPABILITIES
Local police: Coalition after Training adds 1 Police free from anywhere to any 1 space with Coalition Troops.
Police recruits unsteady: Each Coalition Training places no more
than 1 Police per space.
The concept of Village Stability Operations was to tie together building local defense forces, strengthening or reviving local governance,
and exploiting opportunities for economic development at the village
level, under the leadership of Coalition special operations forces or
specially trained conventional troops. Programs along these lines
began in 2005, but the concept was applied on a much wider scale
beginning in 2010, together with the creation of a new security
force, the Afghan Local Police, who had been trained largely by
US Special Forces troops. (Hulslander, passim; US DoD Report on
Progress, p. 64-66)
13. Anti-Corruption
Drive CWTG
“We mean it this time”: Until
Prop, Govern transfers no Patronage.
MOMENTUM
Game the system: Government
selects Troop or Police targets
for a free Suborn in 1 space and
adds +3 Patronage.
Widespread corruption, especially bribery, was a major
issue in Afghanistan and a
formidable obstacle to the Government’s gaining any legitimacy or trust from its citizens.
President Karzai issued several decrees directing crackdowns on
corruption in the judicial, law enforcement, and local government
sectors. While some progress was made in the later years of the
Coalition’s time in Afghanistan, the country remained one of the
most corrupt in the world. (UNODC Report on Afghan Corruption,
passim; US DoD Report on Progress, p. 78-80)
14. Economic Project CWTG
Erode networks: In each space with cubes, replace an Insurgent
Faction’s Base with its Guerrilla.
Civil-military friction misdirects aid: An Insurgent gains +3 Resources per space with both a COIN Base and its piece.
Billions of dollars were spent in Afghanistan in the attempt to
re-activate the country’s moribund civilian economy. But such
large amounts of money went astray as often as they benefitted or
stabilized communities, due to such factors as poor police and administrative leadership, corruption, theft, abuse of civilians, or the
inability of security forces to protect Non-Government Organizations. (Moyar, p. 208)
15. One Tribe at a Time CWTG
Engagement: In a COIN-Control Province, remove all Guerrillas
and buy any Civic Action desired.
Entrepreneur warlord: In an Uncontrolled Province, replace up to
3 Govt or Taliban pieces with any Warlord pieces.
In 2009, a United States Special Forces member wrote a paper with
the title “One Tribe at a Time”, emphasizing the basic role that
tribes play in Afghan society, and proposing the development of
Tribal Engagement Teams who would live and fight with the tribes
in countering the Taliban. His ideas were not officially adopted, but
there were attempts to engage tribal leaders, and many militias that 
32 A Distant Plain — PLAYBOOK

were stood up were actually tribal in nature. (Gant passim; Giustozzi
p. 190) Not every analyst agreed with these ideas, some stressing
the damage done to tribal power structures over the previous 30
years of violence or concluding that people would continue to act in
accordance with whatever opportunities and events that might arise
outside tribal structures. (Meinshausen; Johnson; Giustozzi p. 16)
16. Amnesty CWGT
Cash in now: Each Support or
COIN-Control space, pay –1
Govt Resource to remove a
Guerrilla.
OK to be me: Replace any 2
Insurgent pieces with the other
Insurgent’s pieces of the same
type.
There were infrequent amnesty
initiatives to get Taliban members or individual warlords to
reintegrate into Afghan society
and participate in local politics.
They generally were neither
effective nor very popular with
the civilian population, many of whom saw them as government
collusion with the enemy (Afsar; Giustozzi p. 208; US DoD Report
on Progress p. 81-82)
17. NATO CWGT
ISAF bolstered: Move all Troop
Casualties or, if none, removed
Coalition Troops to Available.
Command strictures: Until
Prop, Coalition Ops, Air Lift,
Surge only where already Coalition.
MOMENTUM
Dozens of countries from
within and without the North
Atlantic Treaty Organization
sent contingents of troops to
Afghanistan, but only a few of
them permitted their troops to
engage the Taliban directly in
offensive military operations. (Collins, p. 64; Moyar, p. 205)
18. PRTs CWGT
COALITION CAPABILITIES
Development detachments: Coalition Training Operation may buy
Civic Actions in 1 or 2 spaces.
Defensive posture: Coalition Assault may target only 1 space per card.
Provincial Reconstruction Teams (PRTs) were created by the United
States Army as small joint civil-military organizations with the triple
aim of creating local security, fostering better cooperation between
different agencies working in the same area, and promoting reconstruction. By 2011, there were 27 PRTs operating in the majority of
Afghanistan’s provinces, about half of them commanded by United
States officers. The PRTs were a generally positive development
in that they delivered several billion dollars of economic aid and
initiated thousands of projects. But there were tensions between the
civilian, military, and non-governmental organizations that worked
within the concept. (Collins, p. 66-67; Moyar, p. 200)
19. Al-Qaeda TCGW
Jus ad bellum: Govt Resources +9. Aid +9. Coalition executes a
free Surge
Helpmate: Taliban free Terror or Attack in each Afghan space with
Underground Taliban. No Guerrillas Activate
In the days of the Taliban Government (1996-2001), al-Qaeda
established facilities in Afghanistan for its members and leaders to
train, meet, and plan operations. In return, the Taliban received large
amounts of money, donated to al-Qaeda from individuals and organizations in the Arab world, and al-Qaeda members trained Taliban
fighters. From 1998, the United States and Saudi Arabia pressured the
Taliban to hand over Usama Bin Ladin to face criminal proceedings
for Al-Qaeda’s attacks on US targets, and it was their refusal to do so
after 9/11 that led to the launch of “Operation Enduring Freedom”.
(Afsar; Collins p. 41-52) With the Coalition in Afghanistan, al-Qaeda
turned a part of its anti-US effort to insurgency there.
20. Errant Air Strike
TCGW
Focus on ground war: Coalition executes a free Surge
ignoring Control and without
removing to Available.
Wedding hit: Set a Province
with Coalition and Taliban to
Opposition. Place a Terror there
In any given year of the conflict,
the Taliban were responsible for
the great majority of civilian
casualties. (Brookings Afghanistan Index, passim) However,
when Coalition manned aircraft
or UAVs struck the wrong
target or caused significant civilian casualties in Close Air Support
operations, the event received wide publicity in both the Western
and Arab-language media.
21. Operation Iraqi Freedom TCGW
Flypaper: Taliban must remove a Base, a die roll of Guerrillas, and
a die roll of Resources.
Quagmire: Coalition removes 2 of its pieces from Available to
Casualties and is Ineligible through next card.
It was a common criticism that the invasion of Iraq in 2003 and the
lengthy insurgency that followed it proved a fatal diversion from
the US-led effort in Afghanistan. This was neither completely true
nor false: the modest commitment of US forces to Afghanistan in
2002-04 was not yet opposed by a strong Taliban insurgency, and
the official focus was on rebuilding Afghan government and society
and reconstituting its security forces. By 2005-06, the escalating
demands of the Iraqi insurgency did prevent effective reinforcement
of Afghanistan, just at the time the Taliban insurgency was gaining
traction, but by 2009-10 the winding-down of the force commitment
in Iraq permitted a significant “surge” of troops, aid, and resources.
(Collins, 77-80)
22. Border Incident TCWG
Taliban insertion foiled: Remove any 3 Taliban Guerrillas in or
adjacent to Pakistan.
Pakistan furious: Shift Islamabad 2 boxes toward Sponsorship.
Executing Faction remains Eligible


Both Pakistan and Afghanistan maintained considerable forces in a
system of garrisons and outposts to maintain control over the border
between the two countries, and Coalition forces often operated very
near the border to try and interdict insurgent movements. Exchanges
of fire occurred and sometimes escalated into diplomatic incidents.
23. Roadside IEDs TCWG
TALIBAN CAPABILITIES
JIEDDO counter-IED tactics:
Taliban Attacks can remove
no more than 1 Coalition piece
per space.
Casualties mount: Each Taliban
Attack removes a 3rd piece and
Sabotages an adjacent empty
LoC
The Joint Improvised Explosive
Device Defeat Organization
(JIEDDO) was created in 2006
by the US Department of Defense in order to tackle the
problem the Taliban’s and other
insurgents’ use of IEDs, the leading cause of death or injury among
Coalition troops in Afghanistan. JIEDDO adopted a mix of simple
and complex methods: an example of the former was paving roads
(which not only made roadside IEDs harder to conceal, but also
improved the local economy and hence relations with the populace).
(Kilcullen, Accidental Guerrilla, p. 99-102)
24. US-Taliban Talks TCWG
Selective fire: Until Propaganda, Taliban Operations may
not remove Coalition pieces
(mark).
MOMENTUM
No sudden moves: Until Propaganda, no Coalition Assault
(mark).
MOMENTUM
Direct, official contact between
representatives of the United
States and the Taliban began in
late 2010. Earnest and productive negotiations held out the
possibility of reducing the pace
of operations in Afghanistan.
Meetings took place in Germany and Qatar, but progress was slow.
(US DoD Report on Progress, p. 82)
25. Koran Burning TGCW
Compensation: Remove any Terror markers desired from spaces
with Coalition.
Riots: Shift Kabul and a Province with Coalition pieces each 1 level
toward Opposition.
In February 2010, a number of Korans and other religious texts were
accidentally burned by United States servicemen in an incinerator
at Bagram Air Field north of Kabul. The ensuing riots in Afghan
cities resulted in over 30 deaths. Videos of acts by Coalition personnel such as urinating on or desecrating corpses of Taliban fighters
provoked similar responses.
26. MANPADS Scare TGCW
False alarm—fly the friendly skies: Coalition Air Lifts any Troops
among 5 spaces, then LimOps in 1, free.
Whoosh!: Until Prop, Taliban may cancel (count as executed) any
Air Lift or Air Strike for –1 Resource.
MOMENTUM
The Taliban had no anti-aircraft weapons except light automatic
guns or rocket-propelled grenades, which could be effective against
low-flying helicopters. However, if they had obtained shipments of
Man-Portable Air Defense Systems (MANPADS), it might have
proven as significant a development as when the mujaheddin began
to use US-supplied Stinger missiles against Soviet aircraft in the
late 1980s.
27. Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan TGCW
TTP attack in Pakistan: Shift Islamabad 2 boxes toward Hostility.
TTP support Quetta Shura: Taliban place 2 pieces in or adjacent to
Pakistan and add +3 Resources.
The Tehrik-i-Taliban (TTP) or “Pakistan Taliban” was a religious
extremist movement within Pakistan that was mainly active in the
Northwest Frontier Province dominated by the Pashtun nationality. The TTP and Quetta Shura Taliban, the main Afghan Taliban
organization, had similar beliefs and objectives and occasionally
cooperated; the TTP also was responsible for a large number of incidents in major Pakistani cities, provoking a violent response from
the Army. (Kilcullen Accidental Guerrilla, p. 237-238)
28. Karzai to Islamabad TGWC
“I’m listening”: Shift Islamabad 2 boxes toward Hostility.
“I hear you knocking but you can’t come in”: Taliban Resources
+6. Government Ineligible through next card.
The main diplomatic issue between Afghanistan and Pakistan has
been the Durand Line, an artificial creation of the British Empire
that divides the Pashtun nationality in two, and the associated issues it raises of territorial integrity, tribal revolt, and the use by
Afghan insurgents of Pakistani territory as a sanctuary. Pakistan
would prefer a stable and functioning Afghan Government, as a
counterweight to the influence of India, but the frequent border
skirmishes put both governments in a difficult position. (US DIA
“(New) Great Game”)
29. Night Letters TGWC
TALIBAN CAPABILITIES
Threats resented: Taliban Terror shifts to Neutral not Opposition.
Intimidation: Training places no more than 4 cubes per space
During the Soviet-Afghan War, the mujaheddin would often leave
“night letters” – literally a letter left at someone’s door at night to
warn collaborators or to intimidate the population. In 2005 the Taliban revived this tactic with considerable success. (Collins, p. 73)
30. Urban Specialists TGWC
TALIBAN CAPABILITIES
Ineffective: Taliban Terror in Kabul requires Activation of 2 Underground Guerrillas.
Effective: Taliban Terror in Kabul costs 0 Resources and does not
Activate the Guerrilla.
Insurgents need to go where the people are, and a lot of them are in
the main urban center of Kabul. The Taliban have been ingenious
in using technically skilled fighters to collect intelligence, plan 
34 A Distant Plain — PLAYBOOK

assassinations, and conduct spectacular high-visibility attacks on
government buildings. (Moreau; Giustozzi p. 70)
31. Car Bombs TWCG
TALIBAN CAPABILITIES
Better VCP drills: Ambush Activates all Taliban in the space.
VBIEDs: 1 Taliban Ambush
space may use an Active Guerrilla. Place no Guerrilla in that
space.
The JIEDDO (see card 23)
has three lines of operation:
“Attack the Network” (to discover IEDs before they are
planted by fostering good intelligence-gathering relations
with the local population),
“Defeat the Device” (through detection and neutralization of IEDs
by technical means, and protecting vehicles and personnel against
their effects), and “Train the Force” (to detect, identify and react
to IEDs). (JIEDDO website) Vehicle check points (VCPs) were a
principle means of keeping Taliban car bombs (vehicle-borne improvised explosive devices, or VBIEDs) away from critical targets.
32. Haqqani TWCG
Frictions with Quetta: Taliban remove a Base and 3 Guerrillas from
Northwest Frontier.
Taliban right hand: Taliban place a Base and 3 Guerrillas in or
adjacent to Northwest Frontier.
The Haqqani Network was an important insurgent organization based
in Waziristan. It was allied with al-Qaeda, the Quetta Shura Taliban,
and the Hezb-e-Islami front (an Afghan Islamist organization, see
card 35), though coordination between these main organizations was
irregular. (Kilcullen, Accidental Guerrilla, p. 48)
33. Suicide Bombers TWCG
TALIBAN CAPABILITIES
Extremists expended: Taliban each Terror must remove a Taliban
Guerrilla from 1 selected space.
Willing martyrs: Taliban Terror removes 1 enemy piece (Faction’s
Base last) from 1 of the Terror spaces, Coalition to Casualties.
Beginning in 2006, the number of suicide bombings in Afghanistan
increased rapidly, even as the technical failure rate for bombing
attempts dropped. The tactic was effective in damaging targets but
of dimishing political effect because of the large numbers of civilian
casualties that occurred in each bombing. Also it relied on foreign
fighters brought into the theater: the majority of individual bombers
were not Afghans. (Giustozzi, 108-109, 148-149)
34. Accidental Guerrillas TWGC
TALIBAN CAPABILITIES
Easy come, easy go: Remove Taliban Guerrillas that Redeploy.
Drawn in: After Coalition completes an Assault operation, Taliban
may place a Guerrilla into any 1 of the Assault spaces.
David Kilcullen’s 2009 book The Accidental Guerrilla explores
in depth the problems posed by Western interventions to counter
insurgencies in the developing world. In Afghanistan, the mistrust
of foreigners, disruption of traditional networks and power relationships, and regional or global ideological or religious movements all
combined to create a complex resistance to what the Coalition was
trying to accomplish, as young Afghan males joined in the violence
local to their community, on the side resisting foreign invasion.
35. Gulbuddin Hekmatyar TWGC
Islamist infighting: Remove up to 3 Taliban pieces from 1 space.
Hezb-e-Islami front: Place a Taliban Base and Guerrilla in a Neutral
or Opposition Pashtun Province.
Gulbuddin Hekmatyar is the leader of Hezb-e-Islami or “Party of
Islam”, an important insurgent organization based in the Northwest
Frontier Province and allied with the Quetta Shura Taliban. (Collins,
p. 72) Coordination between them was loose, however. (Kilcullen,
Accidental Guerrilla, p. 48)
36. Mullah Omar
TWGC
Taliban leader killed: Flip all
Taliban Guerrillas to Active.
Islamist unifier: Next Support
phase, Sharia also allowed if
Uncontrolled and any Taliban.
MOMENTUM
Mullah Mohammad Omar is
the leader of the Quetta Shura
Taliban, the main insurgent organization in southern Afghanistan. He does not direct daily
operations but is an important
spiritual leader and coordinator
among allied insurgent organizations, such as the Haqqani Network and Hezb-e-Islami. Resilient
as the Taliban may be, his death or capture would have proven a
shock to the group. (Dressler, p. 1-2; Collins, p. 72)
37. Afghan Commandos GCTW
Surprise strike: Govt moves any 1-4 Govt Troops to a space. They
then free Sweep and free Assault there.
Flashy forces dissipate scarce resources: Govt Resources -6. Aid
-6. Executing Faction remains Eligible.
The Afghan National Army Order of Battle includes a commando
battalion in each of its six corps, plus a separate Special Operations
Command of three commando brigades and a Special Forces brigade, trained along US lines. The first commando battalions became
operational in 2007 but, like other Afghan Army units, suffered from
personnel turbulence and needed training, transport, and logistical
support from Coalition units and bases. (Radin; US DoD Report on
Progress p. 24, 32)
38. Night Raids GCTW
Effective tactics: Remove all Insurgent Bases from any 2 spaces
with Coalition Troops.
Kabul defends privacy: Government free Governs in an Afghan
Support space, ignoring Control and Coalition.
“Night raids” were a tactic used mostly by US Special Forces members to kill or capture individuals on the “Joint Prioritized Effects
List” of important insurgent commanders and organizers. Because
these operations involved sudden night-time forced entries into
civilian houses, there were instances of civilian collateral casualties
and mistaken identity, as well as anger over violation of the sanc-


tity of an Afghan’s home (a major cultural transgression). In April
2012, the Afghan Government obtained agreement that future night
raids would be led by Afghan units, or at least conducted with the
Government’s knowledge and approval.
39. Trilateral Summit GCTW
US spurs Pak-Afghan ties: Shift Islamabad 1 box toward Hostility.
Double game: Shift Islamabad 2 boxes toward Sponsorship. Aid
+3. Patronage +3.
The United States would have much preferred to see stable and
productive relations between Afghanistan and Pakistan, its two
main recipients of military and economic aid in the region. But
Washington’s actual ability to make this so varied. (US DoD Report
on Progress, p. 82)
40. Line Item GCWT
Congress appropriates: Add the lesser of Aid or +15 to Government
Resources.
Cuts: Cut Aid to half its level (round down). Executing Faction
remains Eligible
To quote Ronald E. Neumann, then United States Ambassador to
Afghanistan, in 2005: “Iraq and hurricane relief won, and we lost.”
(Collins, p. 78)
41. NATO Politics GCWT
Alliance commitment: Coalition returns up to 3 pieces that were
removed from play to Available.
Publics dubious of war aims: Remove any 1 Coalition Troops cube
from play.
In the early stages of the war, the governments of various NATO
countries found it relatively easy politically to send contingents
of troops and aid workers to help in reconstruction. As casualties
mounted, these governments found it more difficult to explain
to citizens what these troops were accomplishing, and why their
troops were in harm’s way while other national contingents refused
to commit to the struggle. In February 2010, the Dutch Government collapsed over the issue of keeping a contingent of troops in
Afghanistan.
42. NGOs GCWT
Stabilization: For every 10 Aid
(round down) shift a COIN
Control space 1 level toward
Support.
Poor auditing: Transfer 1 in 5
Aid (round down) to Patronage
Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) were critical
conduits of non-military aid
and support to Afghanistan.
Not surprisingly, therefore,
their workers and projects
were targets for the Taliban,
acting to drive them out of
communities. NGOs also had
an uncomfortable relationship
with the military, and their best efforts could fall prey to the pervasive
government corruption. (Giustozzi, 105-107)
43. Pakistani Offensive GTCW
Militant hunt: Shift Islamabad 2 boxes toward Hostility. Remove
2 Taliban pieces from Pakistan.
All show: Shift Islamabad 1 box toward Sponsorship. Executing
Faction remains Eligible.
Coalition forces operating near the border with Pakistan were not
able to achieve consistent interoperability with the Pakistani Army.
However, the Government of Pakistan was acutely aware of the
threat posed by so many different insurgent organizations operating
from its territory, from Baluchi separatists and the Quetta Shura
Taliban to the Pakistani Taliban. It launched a number of offensives
into the north-west, sometimes taking heavy casualties. (Donahue,
p. 98; Kilcullen, Accidental Guerrilla p. 238-244)
44. Pakistani Politics
GTCW
Shift Islamabad 1 box toward
Tolerance. Then, if at Pressure,
remove 1 Taliban Base from
Pakistan. If at Backing, +6
Taliban Resources. Executing
Faction remains Eligible.
The 2007 Red Mosque Incident
(in which religious students
occupied a mosque in Islamabad that was then stormed
by Pakistani security forces,
with considerable casualties)
and suspected involvement of
the Pakistani Taliban in the
assassination that year of Prime
Minister Benazir Bhutto were examples of the turbulent relationship
between extremist organizations and Pakistan’s politics. (Afsar)
45. Tribal Elders GTCW
A voice in local shuras: Until end of next Propaganda, the Faction
executing this event (mark) may follow any shift it causes in Support/Neutral/Opposition by setting the space to any level.
MOMENTUM
The traditional power and decision-making structure of tribal and
village elders had been largely dismantled in many areas of Afghanistan by the previous 30 years of violence and social upheaval.
Reestablishing this way of doing things would have greatly assisted
whichever faction might harness its power. (Johnson)
46. ID Cards GTWC
TALIBAN CAPABILITIES
Your papers, please: Marching Taliban always Activate when entering non-Pashtun Provinces.
Kandahar Kinko’s Kopies Kards: Flip all Taliban that March into a
Pashtun space Underground.
Control of population movement is an important part of many counterinsurgency strategies, and issuing identification cards and local
censuses are good ways to accomplish this. But cards can be forged
or stolen. (FM 3-24 Counterinsurgency, 5-33, 5-73)
47. Loya Jirga GTWC
Political alliances shore up national government: Set 2 Neutral
non-Pashtun spaces to Support.
Pashtuns fear erosion of dominance: Set 3 Neutral Pashtun Prov-
36 A Distant Plain — PLAYBOOK

inces to Opposition.
A Loya Jirga or “grand council” is a traditional Pashtun method of
political consultation or discussion of large or especially urgent issues. There have been several Loya Jirga held at the national level
under the Karzai Government, to discuss such issues as the new
Afghan constitution (2003) or to consider peace negotiations with
the Taliban (2009, 2010). The outcomes of these conferences could
lead to important political realignments within the Afghan Government. (Collins, p. 64-65)
48. Strategic Partners GTWC
New Delhi help: Aid +6, Govt Resources +6, Patronage +1.
Pakistani fears fed: Shift Islamabad 2 boxes toward Sponsorship
India was the largest regional donor to Afghanistan during the period and had an interest in the creation and maintenance of a stable
regime there, both as a counterweight to Pakistan’s influence and
to contain the spread of extremism and terrorism. (US DIA “(New)
Great Game”)
49. Crop Substitution
GWCT
Slash and burn: Govt free
Eradicates in any 1 Province
with Govt cubes. Remove all
Warlord pieces there.
Diversify: Govt removes
1 Warlord Base. Warlords then
free Cultivate in up to 3 eligible
spaces (as if Rallied there).
Eradication of opium crops
proved to be effective only on
a very temporary basis, and
usually worsened the situation
of the small farmers who did
most of the work of raising poppies. Afghanistan was also the world’s
leader in production of hashish, although the amount of land used for
cultivation and the amounts of money involved was much smaller.
(CMFC Counter-Narcotics in Afghanistan, p. 14-15, 25-26)
50. Development Aid GWCT
Funds to projects: Coalition and Govt conduct Civic Action as if
Support Phase, but spending Aid instead of Resources.
Local diversion opportunity: +3 Patronage. Warlords add a die roll
in Resources.
Billions of dollars flowed into Afghanistan from foreign donors
to improve the country’s infrastructure and economic function.
Thousands of large and small projects were completed, to address
all sectors of need in Afghan society, but progress was hampered by
pervasive corruption, lack of security to protect completed projects,
diversion of funds, and a thriving illegal economy based on narcotics
that was far more profitable than any legitimate business. (Collins
p. 66-71; Giustozzi 198-200)
51. Karzai GWCT
President taps cousins: +1 Patronage per space at Support.
President deals to keep office: Transfer 2 die rolls of Patronage to
Warlord Resources.
Hamid Karzai, a Pashtun, was appointed President at the Bonn
Accords in 2002. He thereafter was elected twice, though the
legitimacy of the elections was disputed. The office of President
exerted considerable power under Afghanistan’s new Constitution,
but this document also required Karzai to give up power in 2014.
Like most men who had reached the height of national leadership
of Afghanistan, he survived by making deals and brokering relationships among a complex web of family, ethnic, and religious
organizations in a continuous and delicate balancing act. (Collins,
p. 92-93; Moyar, p. 201-204)
52. Power Shuffle
GWTC Kabul respected: Replace up
to 5 Warlord Guerrillas with
Police.
Kabul spurned: Replace up to 5
Police with Warlord Guerrillas.
See card 51. A major early
achievement of Karzai’s presidency was the disarmament and
reintegration of many warlord
militia forces in 2003-2004.
(Collins, p. 64-65)
53. Prison Break GWTC
Guards bought: An Insurgent
transfers 3 Resources to Patronage and places a piece where there
is a Govt piece.
Guards inept: Replace a Government piece with a Guerrilla.
Coalition analysts agreed that the corrections system in Afghanistan
is in need of significant improvement. There was a continued need
for better constructed prisons, more and better screened guards, and
a restoration of civilian faith that the prison system will be humane,
secure, and impartial. This faith was shaken by several mass prison
breaks that took place both with and without the connivance of
the guards, as well as early releases of criminals who had political
influence. (US DoD Report on Progress, p. 74-76)
54. Profit Sharing GWTC
Funneled to war effort: Warlords transfer 2 die rolls’ Resources to
Government
…or not: Warlords execute a free round of Traffic everywhere possible but add no Patronage.
Profits from illegal and semi-legal activities by warlords did not
always benefit the Taliban; occasionally such activities would deliver
resources to the central government in exchange for other considerations such as influential offices or a promise of non-interference.
55. Breaktime WCTG
War-weary fighters vote with their feet: Coalition removes up to a
die roll of Guerrillas.
Troops help with harvest: Remove up to a die roll of Government
cubes, no more than 1 per space.
The tempo of fighting in Afghanistan is dominated by several climatic and agricultural factors: the cold winter, the harvest season for
legitimate crops, and the timing of the poppy harvest. Both Taliban
fighters and ANA/ANP troops will take breaks to rest, retrain, and
bring in the sheaves.
56. Fratricide WCTG
I thought we were buddies: Remove a Warlord Guerrilla and Base
from a space with Taliban.


Friendly uniforms fire on mentors: At 2 spaces with Govt Troops—1
Coalition Troop or, if none, 1 Coalition Base to Casualties.
Incidents in which Afghan troops or policemen wounded or killed
members of Coalition forces working with them as embedded
trainers or advisors increased after 2010. (Brookings Afghanistan
Index, passim) While the absolute number of people killed in these
incidents was small, and most of the incidents were not the result of
Taliban infiltration of the Afghan security forces, each one eroded
trust between Coalition and Government forces. (US DoD Report
on Progress, p. 68-69). Meanwhile, it was not unknown for Taliban
forces in an area to break local truces if they perceived it to be to
their advantage.
57. Sandstorms WCTG
Airborne grit: Until Propaganda, no Air Lift or Transport, Taliban
March only 1 adjacent space, and Sweep Activates only 1 Guerrilla
per 3 cubes (round down). Executing Faction remains Eligible.
MOMENTUM
There’s a reason that Coalition troops call Afghanistan “The Sandbox”.
58. Counter-Narc WCGT
Interdicted: Until Propaganda, halve (round down) Resources to
Warlords from each Traffic.
MOMENTUM
Kabul buys crop: Transfer 1 Govt Resource to Warlords per COIN
Control space with Warlords. +1 Patronage.
Increased presence of security forces, especially Coalition troops,
tended to reduce the amount of opium produced in major growing
areas such as Helmand Province. However, troop presence was only
a temporary solution, and the process of interdicting and arresting the
people responsible for trading opium was susceptible to corruption
(US DoD Report on Progress, p. 94-95; CMFC Counter-Narcotics
in Afghanistan, p. 26-27, 48-49). In strict dollar terms, it might
have been cheaper for the Afghan Government, with support from
Coalition nation governments, to simply buy opium from farmers
and either destroy it or process it into morphine and other drugs for
legitimate medical use, as done in India. The latter measure might
even have been profitable. However, these expedients would not
address the deeper issue of the narcotics trade, addiction among
the civilian population, corruption, and the great distortions that
opium production as a cash crop produced in Afghanistan’s largely
agricultural economy.
59. Local Truce WCGT
Govt transfers 6 Resources to
Warlords. No Warlords Attack,
Terror, or Suborn until after
Propaganda. Executing Faction
remains Eligible.
MOMENTUM
Temporary truces were a feature of this and many other insurgencies throughout history.
A small amount of pecuniary
persuasion can buy a lot of elbow room. (Giustozzi 210-213)
60. Tajiks WCGT
Tajiks rally against Taliban threat: Shift 2 non-Pashtun spaces each
1 level toward Support.
Tajiks rally against Pashtun rule: Transfer a die roll of Patronage
to Warlords Resources.
Tajiks are the second largest ethnic group in Afghanistan, after Pashtuns. They comprise about 30% of the population and are concentrated in the northern and northeastern regions of the country. Tajik
fighters dominated the Northern Alliance that resisted the Taliban
during the Emirate period (1996-2001), and as such were important
figures in the reformation of the Afghan Government. However, Tajik
dominance in certain critical areas, such as the ANA officer corps,
was later scaled back to a more nationally representative percentage.
(Collins, p. 8; Moyar, p. 196; Brookings Afghanistan Index)
61. Desertions & Defections WTCG
Remove up to 3 Guerrillas anywhere or replace them with the other
Faction’s Guerrillas. Executing Faction pays 1 Resource per Guerrilla (unless Coalition or at 0).
The Taliban combined an unsophisticated and decentralized overall
command system with a surprising degree of small-unit cohesion,
based on personal loyalty to tactical commanders, who were responsible for units of 5-50 men. However, the Taliban recruited from
varied sources, and each recruit had his own reasons for joining and
staying with his unit. If these reasons were not fulfilled, he would
leave. The same also was true of the many and varied organizations that made up the forces of what were known as Warlords.
(Giustozzi, p. 91-93)
62. Local Understanding WTCG
In 1 space, Taliban free Attack COIN pieces; Activate and count
Warlord Guerrillas as Taliban.
Warlords and Taliban each add +3 Resources per Warlord Base
under Taliban Control.
In a variant of the “accidental guerrilla” phenomenon, the Taliban
often were able to hire “pick-up teams” of young males, paid daily
in cash, to join in operations against the Coalition or the Government. The Taliban also had considerable financial resources to offer
to former militia or mujahideen commanders to join the insurgency.
(Giustozzi, p. 72)
63. Teetotalers WTCG
Strictly Koran: Remove 1 Warlord Base from each Taliban Control
space, –1 Taliban Resource each.
Lighten up, man: Each space with Warlord pieces, Warlords may pay
–1 Resource per Taliban Guerrilla to remove any of them.
During the period of the Taliban Government, opium production
was discouraged, and indeed was almost completely shut down in
2001. (CMFC, Counter-Narcotics in Afghanistan, p. 13) After the
“re-launch” of the Taliban insurgency in 2003-04, opium production reached higher and higher levels. While the Taliban found
participating in the process profitable (about 10% of the entire value
of the opiates trade ended up in Taliban hands, estimates of the
value varying between 70 and 400 million dollars a year: CMFC,
Counter-Narcotics in Afghanistan, p. 44-45), they might again have
decided that narcotics were a social ill with too high a social price
(for example, there are an estimated 1.5 million opium addicts in
Afghanistan, about 5% of the population).
38 A Distant Plain — PLAYBOOK

64. Hazara WTGC
Ethnic cleansing: In each of 2 nonPashtun Mountain spaces— If
Taliban present, set to Opposition. Then, if Warlord pieces exceed
Govt, remove 2 Govt or Taliban pieces. If Govt exceeds Warlords,
remove 2 Warlord pieces.
The Hazara are Shia Muslims and compose about 9% of the population. (The great majority of Afghans are Sunni.) Historically they
have been threatened and discriminated against by the other ethnic
groups, particularly the Pashtuns, and have received few benefits
from associating with the Government. (Afghanistan Smart Book)
Across the border, in Quetta, Hazaras responded to extremist attacks
with plans to organize for self defense, and persecuted Hazaras in
central Afghanistan might have done the same.
65. Islamabad Blocks
Resupply WTGC
COIN effort, Taliban taxes both
hurt: Sabotage both Roads adjacent to Pakistan. -7 Taliban
Resources. Coalition and Govt
Ineligible through next card.
Executing Faction, if Insurgent,
remains Eligible.
In retaliation for incidents
where Pakistani soldiers manning border posts were killed
in accidental exchanges of fire
with Coalition troops, the Pakistani Government twice shut
down the two main routes for
Coalition supplies to reach landlocked Afghanistan from Pakistani
seaports: once in 2010 for a week, and once in 2011-12 for almost
nine months. The Coalition was forced to fly supplies in or use the
Northern Delivery System of minor roads entering from the “Three
‘Stans”. This expedient was extremely expensive, but it did sidestep
the network of Taliban “taxation” and raids on supply convoys along
the southern routes.
66. Mountain Fastness WTGC
Altitude sickness: Move a Faction’s pieces from 2 Mountains where
it has no Bases to Available.
Caves: In a Mountain, place any 2 Insurgent pieces and flip any
Guerrillas desired Underground.
Afghanistan is a high country, about half of it covered by mountains.
In the east, the peaks of the Hindu Kush range rise to over 7,000
meters. Kabul itself is 1,800 meters above sea level. (Collins, p. 5)
This simple fact of geography helped determine how, when, and
where fighting took place: the insurgents could always withdraw to
the mountains but could not remain there for long.
67. Change in Tactics WGCT
Remove any 1 Capabilities marker that is in effect (shaded or unshaded). That Capability no longer applies.
Measures and countermeasures are an enduring aspect of insurgency,
and so not all tactical or technical innovations maintain their battlefield impact for long.
68. Dostum WGCT
Uzbek warlord returns from exile: 2 Support and 2 Opposition
nonPashtun spaces to Neutral. Replace 3 Govt or 3 Warlord pieces
in non-Pashtun spaces with any pieces of the other.
Abdul Rashid Dostum, an Uzbek, had been a military commander
in Afghanistan’s wars since the 1970s, fighting first against the mujahideen and then the Taliban. For a short time he was the Deputy
Minister of Defense in Hamid Karzai’s Government, but clashed
with him and went into exile in Turkey. In 2009, he returned to
Afghanistan and established a near-independent, Uzbek-dominated
zone in northern Afghanistan.
69. Mine Removal
WGCT
ANA specialists: Replace any
4 Sabotage with any 1 Government cube each.
Fields cleared: Set a 1-3Pop
Province with COIN Control
to Support and place a Warlord
Base there.
Thirty years of unrelenting
warfare have left millions of
mines and pieces of unexploded ordnance in Afghanistan’s
soil. Clearing routes and areas
to make them safe for civilian
use again would be viewed
positively.
70. Contractor Surge WGTC
Everyone gets a slice: Shift up to 3 spaces with Coalition and Govt
pieces 1 level toward Support. Add +1 Patronage, +1 Taliban Resource, and +1 Warlord Resource per shift.
Wide use of private contractors, especially private security companies employing local nationals, has been a hallmark of both the Iraq
and Afghanistan counterinsurgencies. A case could be made that,
while the behavior of these companies might be effective in solving immediate problems, it might in the long term work against the
counterinsurgents’ interests. For example, it was found that millions
of dollars, paid to private trucking and security companies to run
supply convoys to Coalition bases, ended up in the hands of the Taliban as a result of side deals by the warlords who ran the companies.
(Schwartz, p. 11-18; US HoR Warlord Inc., passim)
71. Coup! WGTC
New Pashtun or ex-Northern Alliance leader: Shift either 3 Pashtun
or 3 non-Pashtun Provinces each 1 level toward Support. Govt Forces
Desert; Govt Troops Redeploy; then adjust Control.
No coup d’etat occurred to change Afghanistan’s Government during
the period, though coups did depose Afghan governments in 1973
and 1978. A move by an ambitious subordinate at the proper time
could be a potent game-changer.
72. Poppy Crop Failure WGTC
Output plummets: Remove 1 Taliban or 2 Warlord Bases.
Prices soar: Remove 1 Warlord piece. Then Insurgents each add +1
Resource per their Guerrilla at Warlord Bases.
While the amounts of money involved in the opium trade are spectacular (over $2 billion annually), prices are highly volatile and crops
can easily fail. (CMFC Counter-Narcotics in Afghanistan, p. 8-13)
Sometimes a major failure would hurt small farmers but enabled
big dealers who had built up stocks to raise their profits as prices
responded to the limited overall supply.