1. British Indian Army Defends the Empire
Raj Con Mus Rev
Colonial occupation: Add up to 6 cubes total to any Cities and
Provinces (up to 3 from Out of Play, remainder from Available).
Local troops mutiny: Remove up to 5 Sepoys from the map,
no more than 2 per space: first 3 to Available, remainder to Out
of Play.
Background. The British Indian Army
was a sizeable military force mainly
composed of Indian soldiers and British
officers. Its primary duty was the defense of India, but it also sent significant
forces to the Western Front in WWI, and
the Mediterranean and Asian theaters in
WWII.
2. Viceroy Irwin Meets with Gandhi
Raj Con Rev Mus
The Two Mahatmas fail to agree on core issues: Arrest up to
5 Activists total in any Support spaces.
Gandhi negotiates release of prisoners: Release twice a die
roll of Activists from Jail to any spaces.
Background. In 1931, a year after The Salt March (Event 55),
Viceroy Lord Irwin met with Gandhi in an attempt to convince
him and Congress to participate in the upcoming 2nd Round
Table Conference (Event 27). While the government agreed to
release jailed activists and relax its restrictions on salt production in exchange for the end of civil disobedience, Gandhi was
later criticized for ending the campaign with little to show for it.
3. India is the Jewel in the Crown
Raj Mus Con Rev
London guarantees anti-insurgency funds: Add 5 times Restraint to Raj Resources.
Parliament tightens its purse: Subtract twice a die roll from
Raj Resources.
Background. The title of Paul Scott’s 1966 novel has since
become a stand-in for British India during the Raj era, emphasizing the important role that India played in the British imperial
project of the late 19th and early 20th centuries.
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Raj. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for NP Raj.
T NP Congress. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for NP
Congress.
T NP Muslim League. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for
NP Muslim League.
T NP Revolutionaries. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for
NP Revolutionaries.
4. Simon Commission Report Published
Raj Mus Rev Con
All-British committee ignores Indian grievances: Remove up
to 4 Activists, up to 1 Protest marker, and up to 1 Unrest marker
from the map.
Unrest spreads after death of protester: Add up to 4 Activists
and up to 2 Unrest markers to any spaces (Strike if on Railway).
Background. The Indian Statutory Commission, known popularly as the Simon Commission after its chairman John Simon,
was formed in 1927 to assess possible constitutional reforms
that would give Indians greater representation in government.
Though eventually leading to the 1935 Government of India
Act (Event 29), the commission was vocally criticized for not
including any Indian members. Widespread public protests
were organized across India, which sometimes turned violent
(Event 47).
5. 1st Round Table Conference in London
Raj Rev Con Mus
British reassert their authority to rule India: In 1 Muslim space,
remove a Muslim State if present and shift that space 2 levels
towards Active Support.
Gandhi remains in India: Set up to 3 States to Passive Opposition.
Background. The Round Table Conferences were the first time
that British and Indian officials met as equals. The 1st Conference, held from November 1930 to January 1931 was fraught
with political controversy, coming after Congress declared Home
Rule in 1929 (Event 33) and Gandhi’s Salt March in 1930 (Event
55). Many Congress officials, including Gandhi, chose not to
attend this first meeting.
Non-player Event Instructions.
T NP Muslim League. Per 8.8.3, only selects States in Muslim
spaces: Jammu & Kashmir or any Muslim States in a Muslim
space.
6. Chauri Chaura Massacre
Raj Rev Mus Con
Protesters burn police station: In 1 Protest space, remove all
pieces belonging to 1 Faction: Gandhi and Activists to Jail;
cubes, Guerrillas, and Bases to Available.
‘It’s only an eye for an eye’: Add an Unrest marker to 1 space
with both Activists and Troops, remove 2 cubes there, and set
the space to Neutral.
Background. In the United Provinces in 1922, Raj police opened
fire on a nonviolent protest during the Rowlatt Satyagraha (Event
26), killing three. Angered by the attack, the crowd rushed at
the police who retreated into their station. The protesters set
the building ablaze, killing 23. In response to the escalation
of violence, Gandhi feared that many had not fully embraced
nonviolence and called an end to the campaign, a decision he
was widely criticized for.
EVENT TEXT AND NOTES
34 Gandhi ~ Playbook
© 2019 GMT Games, LLC
7. Jawaharlal Nehru Rises to Prominence
Con Raj Mus Rev
Congress factions squabble: In spaces with Congress Activists,
add up to 5 Sepoys from Out of Play.
Nehru provides inspirational leadership: Add up to 4 Activists or Guerrillas to spaces with Congress pieces (up to 2 from
Out of Play).
Background. Jawaharlal Nehru was
born to a prominent family in northern
India. He was Gandhi’s constant supporter and student, participated in all the
major nonviolence campaigns, and was
jailed many times for defying British
authority. Nehru gradually became the
political face of Congress and was the
obvious choice to lead the newly independent nation of India as its first Prime
Minister. The Nehru family continues to
play a significant role in Indian politics.
8. Webb Miller Interviews Gandhi
Con Raj Rev Mus
Western media support British rule: In 1 Protest or Unrest
space, remove 1 Guerrilla or Activist per cube to Available, then
remove 1 Protest or 1 Unrest marker.
Reporter promotes nonviolence: Shift up to 2 Protest spaces
each 1 level towards Active Opposition.
Background. Webb Miller was an American journalist who met
Gandhi while travelling through India in 1930. They became
friends and Miller was present during the events of the 1930 Salt
March (Event 55). He witnessed and reported on the Dharasana
Salt Works raid (Event 12), describing in detail the brutality of
the Raj police. “I have never witnessed such harrowing scenes
as at Dharasana,” he wrote. Though initially censored by British officials, when finally released his reporting brought global
attention to the independence movement.
9. Jallianwala Bagh Assault Shocks India
Con Mus Raj Rev
General Dyer’s ‘Lesson for all India’: Add 1 Unrest marker to
2 spaces with Troops, then in each space remove 1 Guerrilla or
Activist for every cube there (all to Available).
Sikh protesters massacred: Add 1 Unrest marker to a space with
cubes, then remove up to 4 pieces there to Available (Bases last).
Shift the space 2 levels towards Active Opposition.
Background. In 1919, Gandhi called
for nationwide protests against the recently enacted Rowlatt Act (Event 26).
In Punjab, tensions quickly escalated
after the arrest of two prominent Sikh
independence leaders. British Indian
Army troops arrived to restore order and
British General Reginald Dyer issued a
proclamation prohibiting public assembly. On 13 April, 1919, several thousand
people gathered in the walled Jallianwala Bagh to celebrate the Sikh new year; General Dyer saw
instead a revolutionary army. He led his troops into the enclosed
space and ordered them to open fire on the crowd. The losses
were staggering: officially 379 people were killed, but other
estimates are much higher. The massacre and subsequent light
handling of General Dyer (he was forced to retire but was hailed
as a hero by many in Britain) contributed to the determination
of Indians to resist British rule by any means.
10. Aundh Experiment in Home Rule
Con Mus Rev Raj
Village self-rule fails: Shift a number of States up to Restraint
each 1 level towards Neutral.
Maharaja shares power: Add Protest markers to up to 3 States.
Shift Restraint +2.
Background. In 1938, Raja Bhawanrao Shriniwasrao, the
leader of Aundh princely state in west-central India and a supporter of the independence movement, agreed to give political
power to the people of Aundh as an experiment in swaraj, or
self-government. Gandhi helped draft a new constitution for
Aundh that was ratified in 1939. The experiment lasted until
1947, when Aundh was incorporated into India along with the
other princely states.
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Revolutionaries. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for
NP Revolutionaries.
11. Aga Khan Palace Made a Prison
Con Rev Raj Mus
Arrest the Mahatma: Arrest Gandhi and all Activists in his
space. Shift Unity –1.
Gandhiji released: Release Gandhi and all Activists from Jail:
Gandhi and 3 Activists to any 1 space, remainder to Available.
Background. Gandhi, his wife Kasturba, and his private secretary Mahadev Desai were imprisoned in Aga Khan palace from
1942 to 1944 during the Quit India Campaign (Event 36). Both
Kasturba Gandhi and Mahadev Desai died from heart disease
during their captivity.
12. Assault on the Dharasana Salt Works
Con Rev Mus Raj
No one through the gates: In 2 spaces with cubes and Protest,
replace both Protest markers with Unrest markers, and arrest
all Activists there.
Sarojini Naidu leads the march: Place Protest markers in up
to 3 spaces with Activists. Shift Restraint –1. Active Faction
remains Eligible.
Background. After the success of The Salt March (Event
55) in 1930, Gandhi planned further acts of civil disobedience.
He wrote to Viceroy Lord Irwin outlining his plan to march to
the Dharasana Salt Works and demand that it be given to the
Indian people. Gandhi was quickly arrested, but others including
Sarojini Naidu took his place. She led protesters to the gates
where they were attacked by police with clubs. Several were
killed and hundreds were wounded. Newspaper reports of the
violence (Event 8) brought into question the legitimacy of British rule in India.
35
© 2019 GMT Games, LLC
Gandhi ~ Playbook
13. Ottoman Collapse Creates a Vacuum
Mus Raj Con Rev
Muslim community in India agitates for independence: Shift
Unity –2 or add 1 Muslim State to any Muslim Province with
no Raj Control (if State placed, Troops there to any Cities).
Muslim community seeks unity within India: Shift Unity +2.
Move 3 pieces from Out of Play to Available.
Background. The end of World War I
brought an end to the Ottoman Empire,
once the largest and most powerful
Muslim empire in history. The last Ottoman Sultan was also the last Caliph,
or political ruler of all Muslims. In India,
some in the Muslim community supported the pan-Islamic aims of the Khilafat movement to return a Caliph to
power, while others looked inward in
support of secular, Indian nationalism.
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Raj. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for NP Raj.
14. Independence Fighters Take Up Arms
Mus Raj Rev Con
Indian Political Intelligence disrupts terror cells: Remove up to
4 Guerrillas from up to 2 spaces. Revolutionaries Resources –3.
Independence martyrs: Either add 5 Guerrillas total to West
Bengal and East Bengal, or Revolutionaries Resources +5.
Background. Violent resistance to British rule was often scattered and small scale, compared with the violent insurgencies
in Colombia, Cuba, Vietnam, and Afghanistan. British police
forces in India kept close tabs on revolutionary groups and British jails, especially the Cellular Jail (Card 32), were filled
with political prisoners.
15. Crackdown at the Qissa Khwani Bazaar
Mus Con Raj Rev
Imperial violence restores order: Add 1 Unrest marker to 1
space without Troops, then remove 1 piece for every Sepoy in
that space to Available (Bases last).
Police massacre hundreds: Add 1 Unrest marker to any space
with cubes. Shift that space 2 levels towards Active Opposition.
Background. In 1930, following the arrest of Pashtun nonviolence leader Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan (Card 17), protesters gathered in the Qissa Khwani Bazaar in Peshawar, in the
Northwest Frontier Province. Troops of the British Indian Army
arrived. The Khudai Khidmatgar (Card 39) protesters refused
to yield. After a tense standoff, the troops opened fire on the
crowd. At the time it was reported that 20 had been killed. Later
estimates put the number in the hundreds.
16. Pakistan Declaration Published in London
Mus Con Rev Raj
Pamphlet stirs sectarian divisions: Add 1 Unrest marker to
up to 2 Muslim spaces, then remove 1 Base from among the
selected spaces.
Choudhry Rahmat Ali coins ‘Pakistan’: Add up to 2 Bases to
Muslim Provinces with room.
Background. Released in 1933 during the Second Round Table
Conference (Card 27), Choudhry Rahmat Ali’s pamphlet was
subtitled Now or Never; Are We to Live or Perish Forever? It
was the first time that the term Pakstan (later Pakistan) was
used in print.
17. Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan
Mus Rev Raj Con
Protests bring attention to the frontier: In Punjab and adjacent
Provinces, remove up to 4 Activists total or shift 2 of those
spaces each 1 level towards Passive Support.
The frontier Gandhi: Add Protest markers to 2 spaces with
Muslim League Activists. Muslim League remains eligible.
Background. Khan Abdul Ghaffar Khan was a devoted student of Gandhi’s methods of nonviolence, from Peshawar in
Northwest Frontier Province. He led the Khudai Khidmatgars
(Card 39) in their active, nonviolent resistance to British rule
in northwest India. Although a Muslim, he remained closely
aligned with Congress and was a fierce opponent of partition.
He spent much of the 1950s and 1960s under house arrest in
Pakistan, and after his death in 1988 was buried in Afghanistan.
18. Jinnah Advocates for Muslim India
Mus Rev Con Raj
The future leader of Pakistan: Add 1 Base to any space with
room. Shift that space and an adjacent space each 1 level towards
Active Support.
Jinnah voices support for Congress: Shift Unity +1 and add
up to 4 Activists to Muslim spaces.
Background. Born in 1876 in Karachi, Muhammad Ali Jinnah
was the leader of the Muslim League from 1913 until the establishment of Pakistan in 1947. Though he originally advocated
Hindu-Muslim unity, Jinnah later came to see partition and a
separate Muslim state as the only way to protect the minority
Muslim community in India. He served as the first GovernorGeneral of Pakistan and is known today as Quaid-i-Azam,
‘Great Leader.’
19. Attack on the Central Assembly in Delhi
Rev Raj Con Mus
Perpetrators caught: In any 1 space, remove up to 3 Underground Guerrillas or all Active Guerrillas.
Symbolic bombing brings attention: Add 1 Unrest marker to 2
spaces with Raj Control. Add 1 Guerrilla to each space.
Background. In 1929, Batukeshwar Dutt and Bhagat Singh
(Card 21) threw leaflets and two bombs into the Central Legislative Assembly building in New Delhi to avenge the death of
Lala Lajpat Rai (Card 47). Both men were quickly arrested, put
on trial, and sentenced to life in prison.
36 Gandhi ~ Playbook
© 2019 GMT Games, LLC
20. Jugantar Formed in Bengal
Rev Raj Mus Con
Revolutionary terrorists: In West Bengal and East Bengal,
remove 1 Guerrilla in each space for every cube there, then
Activate all Guerrillas.
Freedom fighters: Add up to 3 Guerrillas to East Bengal and/
or West Bengal, then flip any Guerrillas there Underground.
Background. Jugantar was an early anti-colonial revolutionary
group that was established in Bengal in 1906. After a failed attempt during WWI to overthrow British rule with German aid
(the so-called German Plot), Jugantar for a time adopted nonviolence and supported Gandhi’s Non-cooperation Campaign
of 1920. Weakened by the arrest of key leaders, and fractured
by competing sects within the group, it officially merged with
Congress in 1938.
21. Bhagat Singh Frustrates the Empire
Rev Con Raj Mus
British arrest Sikh revolutionaries: Remove up to 4 Guerrillas
from any spaces: 2 to available, 2 to out of play.
Independence hero: Add up to 4 Guerrillas to Punjab, then add
an Unrest marker there.
Background. Bhagat Singh was a revolutionary fighter who had perhaps a
bigger impact on the independence
movement after his death than during
his life. In 1928, Singh and other members of the Hindustan Socialist Republican Association (Card 44) killed
a British police officer, John Saunders.
A year later, Singh was arrested for the
Central Assembly bombing (Card 19),
and while in custody was convicted of
the earlier murder. He was hanged in 1931. To this day, Singh
remains a controversial figure: remembered by some as revolutionary martyr, by others as a terrorist.
22. Subhas Chandra Bose Conspires with Japan
Rev Con Mus Raj
Government declares Bose a traitor: Remove up to 4 Guerrillas:
2 to Available, 2 to Out of Play.
Bose rallies support from abroad: In 2 spaces with no Raj
Control, add 2 Guerrillas and remove any 1 adversary piece
(not Gandhi).
Background. Bose was the leader of a radical, socialist wing of
Congress who rose to prominence in the 1930s. He was briefly
President of Congress but was soon ousted from leadership in
1939 after clashing with Gandhi over movement strategy. At
the start of WWII, Bose escaped to Germany, raised a personal
army from Indian soldiers captured in North Africa, and planned
to invade India. Disillusioned with Germany after the invasion
of the Soviet Union, he left his army and fled to Japan. With
Japanese support he raised another force, the Indian National
Army (Card 69), which fought Allied forces in Burma in 1944-
45. Bose died in a plane crash in Taiwan in 1945.
23. Kakori Train Robbery
Rev Mus Con Raj
Heist fails to inspire revolt: In up to 3 spaces, Activate 1 Guerrilla for every cube, then remove up to 5 Active Guerrillas total
from those spaces.
Looting: In up to 3 space with Guerrillas, free Attack then flip
all Guerrillas in the selected spaces Underground.
Background. In 1925, members of the Hindustan Republican
Association (later the Hindustan Republican Socialist Association, Card 44) robbed a train on the Saharanpur to Lucknow
line near Kakori in United Provinces. Some 40 were arrested in
connection with the robbery and four were eventually convicted
and hanged in 1927.
24. Raid on the Chittagong Armoury
Rev Mus Raj Con
Raj spies thwart the raid: Activate up to 5 Guerrillas in any
spaces, then remove 1 Active Guerrilla for each cube in up to
3 of those spaces.
Revolutionaries steal arms: In 1 space, add 2 Guerrillas from
Out of Play, add 1 Unrest marker, and shift the space to Neutral.
Background. In 1930, 65 revolutionaries led by Surya Sen assaulted Chittagong in East Bengal. They captured both the police
armoury and the auxiliary force armoury, but failed to locate
any ammunition. The small army fled into the Chittagong hills,
where there were surrounded by several thousand British troops.
After a gun battle in which twelve revolutionaries and 80 troops
were killed, Sen led his men into hiding among nearby villages.
He was finally found, convicted, and hanged three years later.
25. Montagu Declaration Affirms Imperial Rule
Raj Con Mus Rev
Britain will remain firmly in charge: Shift Restraint –2 and
remove up to 2 Protest and/or Unrest markers.
Imperial overreach prompts resistance: Shift Restraint +2 and
add 1 Protest or 1 Unrest marker to any 2 spaces with friendly
pieces.
Background. Secretary of State for India Edwin Montagu
released a statement in 1917 that “the policy of His Majesty’s
Government is that of the increasing association of Indians in
every branch of the administration.” It was criticized by both
British imperialists and Indian leaders alike.
37
© 2019 GMT Games, LLC
Gandhi ~ Playbook
26. Rowlatt Act Employed in Force
Raj Con Rev Mus
Government suspends civil liberties: In 2 spaces, arrest 1 Activist for every cube.
India’s support of Britain during WWI betrayed: Add 1 Protest
or 1 Unrest marker to any 2 spaces, then shift each space 1 level
towards Active Opposition.
Background. The Anarchical and Revolutionary Crimes Act of
1919 was better known as the Rowlatt Act after the British judge
who recommended that authoritarian measures were necessary
to curb revolutionary activities in India. This legislation gave
British authorities broad powers to arrest and detain suspected
revolutionaries, and was quickly denounced by Congress leaders. Gandhi called for a hartal, or nationwide civil disobedience,
in response. Rising tensions led to the massacre at Jallianwala
Bagh (Card 9), an event that led to the repeal of the Rowlatt
Act in 1922.
27. 2nd Round Table Conference in London
Raj Mus Con Rev
Britain promises limited home rule: Set Restraint to 2 and set
2 spaces with Raj Control to Passive Support.
Broken promises cause disillusionment: Set Restraint to 4 and
place a Protest marker in any 2 spaces with Raj Control.
Background. The events of 1930, including The Salt March
(Card 55) and Dharasana Raid (Card 12), led to the Second
Round Table Conference in 1931. The Gandhi-Irwin Pact earlier that year (Card 2) helped guarantee Gandhi’s participation.
Hopes that the talks would lead to power sharing between British and Indian leaders were soon dashed, as political and ethnic
divisions among both sides precluded real change.
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Revolutionaries. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for
NP Revolutionaries.
28. British Seek to Divide and Rule
Raj Mus Rev Con
‘There is not one India, but several’: Shift Unity –1. Add 1
Muslim League or Revolutionaries Base to any space with room
and shift that space 2 levels towards Active Support.
‘There must be Hindu-Muslim unity, always’: Shift Unity +1
and shift 1 space with Congress Activists 1 level towards Active Opposition.
Background. Thousand year old tensions between the Hindu
and Muslim communities in India provided the Raj government
opportunities to keep Indians divided. While Gandhi was critical of British policies that formalized divisions in law such as
the Communal Award (Card 64), Jinnah took advantage of the
growing divide to cooperate with the British and keep Muslim
League leaders out of Jail during the turbulent 1940s.
29. 1935 Government of India Act
Raj Rev Con Mus
India will remain a crown possession: Remove 1 Muslim State.
Congress or the Muslim League ineligible through the next card.
Limited self-government granted: Place 1 Base or a Muslim
State in 1 Province without Raj Control (if State placed, Troops
there to any Cities).
Background. The 1935 Government of India Act replaced the
similarly named 1919 Act and, in theory, introduced the possibility of federal power sharing in India. The British would retain
control of the national government, but provincial power would
be given to elected Indian politicians. In the 1937 elections,
Congress won power in eight of eleven provinces. Ultimately,
however, the promises of the 1935 Act were unrealized. Congress officials quit their posts en masse to protest the entry of
India into WWII in 1939, and the poor showing by the Muslim
League may have convinced Jinnah to fully embrace partition
(Card 38).
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Raj. Select the Faction to be Ineligible at random, player
Faction first.
T NP Congress. Select the Faction to be Ineligible at random,
player Faction first.
30. Japan Occupies Indochina
Raj Rev Mus Con
Fears of an Indian fifth column: Remove up to 5 Guerrillas or
Activists from spaces with Raj Control to Available, no more
than 2 per space.
Distractions to the east: Remove up to 5 Sepoys from the map,
no more than 2 per space.
Background. India had been at war with Germany since 1939,
but the entry into the war of Japan 1941 put WWII uncomfortably close. With the Imperial Japanese Army on its doorstep,
troops of the British Indian Army (Card 1) played a major role
in the Burma Campaign. At the same time, Gandhi organized
the last major nonviolent campaign, the Quit India Movement
(Card 36), and Subhas Chandra Bose collaborated with the
Japanese to invade British India (Card 22).
31. Satyagraha in Champaran Challenges Rents
Con Raj Mus Rev
‘You yourself raised the rent simply to finance a hunting expedition’: Arrest Gandhi and any Activists with him, then remove
any Protest and Unrest markers from his space.
Gandhi’s first nonviolent campaign in India: Move Gandhi to
Bihar (unless in Jail), then place a Protest marker (if none) and
up to 3 Activists there.
38 Gandhi ~ Playbook
© 2019 GMT Games, LLC
Background. Gandhi’s first trial of the
nonviolent techniques he had developed
during twenty years in South Africa
came in 1917. Invited to Champaran to
investigate the plight of indigo farmers,
Gandhi engaged in successful civil disobedience that gathered national attention and secured British agreements to
relax the demands of the landlords.
Emboldened by this success, Gandhi felt
ready to call for nationwide civil disobedience in response to the Rowlatt Act (Card 26) two years later,
a move he later called his “Himalayan mistake.”
32. Cellular Jail
Con Raj Rev Mus
Prisoners exiled to Black Waters: Move any 2 pieces to Out of
Play (not Gandhi), then Activate any 4 Guerrillas.
Hunger strike draws unwanted attention: Raj Resources –2
for every Activist in Jail, then shift Restraint –2.
Background. Constructed in 1906 on the remote Andaman
Island in the Indian Ocean, Cellular Jail was notorious for the
poor treatment received by the many political prisoners sent
there. In 1933, a hunger strike by 33 prisoners (including Bhagat
Singh, Card 21) brought attention to its poor conditions, and the
prison was closed by 1939.
Non-player Event Instructions.
T NP Congress. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for NP
Congress.
T NP Muslim League. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for
NP Muslim League.
T NP Revolutionaries. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for
NP Revolutionaries.
33. Flag Satyagraha Defies British
Con Mus Raj Rev
Government bans display of nationalist symbols: In spaces
up to Restraint, remove 1 Guerrilla, Activist, Protest, or Unrest
marker.
National tricolour flown defiantly: In spaces up to Unity, remove 1 adversary piece (Bases last, not Gandhi) then release
up to 5 Activists from Jail to Available.
Background. The Raj government had made it a crime to display
nationalist symbols, which of course made it easy to participate
in civil disobedience simply by flying any nationalist flags. The
tricolour-spinning-wheel flag, first proposed by Gandhi in 1921,
gained prominence when it was displayed en masse in Nagpur
in 1923 during the Flag Satyagraha.
34. Protests Shut Down Railways
Con Mus Rev Raj
Strike violence scatters protesters: Arrest all Activists on Railways and remove all Strike markers.
Travel networks disrupted: Add up to 3 Active Activists or 2
Strikes to any Railways.
Background. India had always been a resource colory for Great
Britain, and the railway network was the principal means of
transporting those resources out of India. Although there were
sporadic attacks on individual trains, such as the Kakori Robbery
(Card 23), during nationwide civil disobedience, such as during the Quit India Movement (Card 36), the railway network
itself was targeted, with non-cooperation strikes that shutdown
stations and blocked tracks.
Non-player Event Instructions.
T NP Congress. If Raj is a Non-player Faction, this Event is
not effective (8.8.3) for NP Congress.
T NP Muslim League. If Raj is a Non-player Faction, this
Event is not effective (8.8.3) for NP Muslim League.
T NP Revolutionaries. If Raj is a Non-player Faction, this
Event is not effective (8.8.3) for NP Revolutionaries.
35. Akali Movement Unites Sikhs
Con Rev Raj Mus
Sikh Gurdwara Bill restores order in the Punjab: Place up to
6 cubes in Punjab.
Gurdwara control transferred to local Sikhs: In up to 2 spaces,
add 1 Protest or Unrest marker, then shift each of those spaces
1 level towards Active Opposition.
Background. The Akali Movement in the early 1920s sought to
return control of gurdwaras, Sikh places of worship, from mahants appointed by British governors to the wider Sikh community. Adopting methods of nonviolent resistance, Akalis occupied
several gurdwaras and often faced violent reprisals. The Nankana
massacre (Card 71) brought the issue to nationwide attention,
resulting in the Sikh Gurdwaras Act of 1925, that transferred
control of gurdwaras in Punjab to a Sikh-led committee.
36. Quit India Movement
Con Raj Rev Mus
Preemptive strike at movement leadership: In 1 space with
Activists: add 1 Unrest marker, arrest a die roll of Activists, and
set that space to Neutral.
‘We shall either free India or die in the attempt’: In each of 2
spaces, roll a die; if result is less than or equal to the number of
friendly pieces, remove adversaries equal to roll (Gandhi and
Activists to Jail, Bases last).
Background. Many Indians felt betrayed that the entry of
India into the war in 1939 occurred without much consultation
with Indian leaders. Gandhi called for mass civil disobedience,
leading to the largest protests of the independence movement
and the arrest of over 100,000 activists. The Muslim League
instead collaborated with the British, and issued the Lahore
Resolution (Card 38) in 1940, declaring that it would seek a
separate state for Muslims.
39
© 2019 GMT Games, LLC
Gandhi ~ Playbook
37. Delhi Proposals Foster Muslim Independence
Mus Raj Con Rev
Muslims granted separate representation: Place a Muslim State
in a Province with no Raj Control (Troops there to any Cities)
and set 2 Muslim spaces to Passive Support. Muslim League
remains eligible through next card.
Jinnah’s proposals highlight divisions: Remove 1 Muslim State
and place a Revolutionaries Base there (if room).
Background. By the 1920s, Congress was split between nationalists, who favored a pan-Indian identity, and communalists, who
sought to preserve centuries old ethnic and religious communities. Meetings between Congress leaders including Nehru (Card
7) and Jinnah (Card 18) in 1927 produced the Delhi Proposals,
aimed at preserving the Hindu majority while guaranteeing a
place for Muslims. Jinnah later rejected the proposal and issued
his own Fourteen Points, a document that pointed the way to
the later partition of India in 1947.
38. Lahore Resolution
Mus Raj Rev Con
Britain denies the possibility of separation: Remove 1 Muslim
State or any 1 Base, then set that space to Passive Support.
The birth of Pakistan: Place a Muslim State in any Muslim
Province (Troops there to any Cities), then place 2 pieces there
from Out of Play.
Background. The long simmering dream
of a separate Muslim state become the
official position of the Muslim League
at its general session in Lahore in 1940.
With WWII raging in Europe and soon
to engulf Asia, the Muslim League broke
with Congress and did not participate in
the Quit India Movement (Card 36),
instead backing the British war effort in
exchange for British support of partition
after the war.
39. Khudai Khidmatgars Active in Northwest
Mus Con Raj Rev
Nationalist divisions split pan-Indian identity: In 2 Muslim
spaces, remove 1 Activist for either every cube or every Guerrilla.
Nonviolence spreads among Pashtun: In 1 Muslim space,
replace up to 3 Sepoys and/or Guerrillas with Activists.
Background. Led by Kahn Abdul Ghaffar Khan (Card 17),
the Khudai Khidmatgars (‘Servants of God’) were a Pashtun
nonviolent group that operated in Northwest Frontier Province
from the mid 1920s until independence. Although Muslims,
they strongly rejected the Muslim League’s call for partition
and instead fully supported Congress.
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Raj. Remove 1 Activist for every cube in the spaces
selected.
T NP Revolutionaries. Remove 1 Activist for every Guerrilla
in the spaces selected.
40. 1939 Defence of India Act
Mus Con Rev Raj
European crisis justifies mass arrests: Shift Restraint –2. Arrest
all Activists in up to 3 Protest spaces.
Refusal to aid Britain against the Axis: Shift Restraint +2. Shift
any 2 spaces each 1 level towards Active Opposition.
Background. Eager to quell the type of revolutionary activities that had spread in India during WWI (Card 20), the Raj
government passed the Defense of India Act soon after the start
of WWII. It gave British authorities additional wartime powers
that were used during the Quit India Movement (Card 36),
resulting in the arrest of 60,000 people within the first weeks
of civil disobedience.
41. Preemptive Strike on Movement Leaders
Mus Rev Raj Con
Congress Working Committee jailed: Arrest up to twice a die
roll total of Activists in any spaces.
‘Every Congress official is in Jail… We’ve even arrested
Nehru’s mother’: Release a die roll of Jailed Activists to any
3 spaces.
Background. In 1942, the All India
Congress Committee met in early August and ratified the Quit India resolution, calling on Britain to withdraw from
India. The next day, Committee members and other Congress leaders were
arrested under the Defense of India Act
(Card 40). The widespread protests that
followed were met with mass arrests. It
was the beginning of the Quit India
Movement (Card 36).
42. Sir Michael O’Dwyer Assassinated
Mus Rev Con Raj
An act of insanity: In up to 2 spaces with Guerrillas and Troops,
remove all Active Guerrillas, then Activate any Underground
Guerrillas.
Revenge for the massacre at Amritsar: Remove 1 Troop or 3
Sepoys each from up to 2 spaces with Unrest or Protest markers.
Background. O’Dwyer was Lieutenant Governor of Punjab in
1919 when the Amritsar massacre occurred (Card 9), afterwards
remarking that General Dyer’s actions that day had been correct.
Many held him responsible for the massacre, including Udham
Singh. In 1940, Singh traveled to London, cornered O’Dwyer
outside Caxton Hall, and shot him dead.
40 Gandhi ~ Playbook
© 2019 GMT Games, LLC
43. Textile Workers Strike
Rev Raj Con Mus
Anti-Communist backlash cuts strike short: In up to 2 spaces,
remove 1 Activist for every cube or for every Guerrilla. Shift
Restraint –1.
Communist support aids the movement: In up to 2 spaces with
Protest and/or Unrest markers, replace up to 2 Guerrillas in each
space with Activists.
Background. The 1928 general strike of 150,000 textile mill
workers in Bombay raised the possibility that the growing
communist movement may join the independence movement.
Ultimately this was prevented by harsh government crackdowns and communist leaders’ unwillingness to align with the
nationalist cause.
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Raj. Remove 1 Activist for every cube in the spaces
selected.
T NP Revolutionaries. Remove 1 Activist for every Guerrilla
in the spaces selected.
44. Hindustan Socialist Republican Association
Rev Raj Mus Con
Execution of terrorists proves popular: Remove up to 2 Guerrillas total from up to 2 spaces, then shift each of those spaces
1 level towards Active Support.
Resistance grows across India: Add up to 4 Guerrillas total to
2 spaces, then shift each of those spaces 1 level towards Active
Opposition.
Background. Founded in 1925 as the Hindustan Republican
Association, the group pledge itself to the destruction of the
Raj through any means, including violence. Its members were
involved in the Kakori Robbery (Card 25), the Central Assembly
Bombing (Card 19), and the attempted assassination of Viceroy
Lord Irwin in 1929. By the early 1930s, most of its members had
been jailed or killed, and the group ceased activity soon after.
45. Gandhi Calls for Liquor Boycott
Rev Con Raj Mus
Boycott fails to change habits: Select 1 Faction to be Ineligible
through the next card. Active Faction remains eligible.
Western culture shunned: Raj Resources –3 for every Protest
marker on the map.
Background. Refusing to purchase British goods as a form of
non-cooperation was a powerful nonviolent tool to bring pressure on the Raj government. During the campaigns of both 1921
and 1930, Gandhi called for a nationwide boycott of British
cloth and liquor. Appealing to shared virtues of abstinence and
purity, the liquor boycott was both a symbolic act and a serious
drain on excise revenue.
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Raj. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for NP Raj.
T NP Muslim Leauge. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for
NP Muslim League.
T NP Congress. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for NP
Congress.
T NP Revolutionaries. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for
NP Revolutionaries.
46. Bardoli Satyagraha for Rent Relief
Rev Con Mus Raj
Reform, but on British terms: Shift up to 3 Princely States each
1 level towards Active Support.
Rent strike gathers support: Shift up to 2 States each 1 level
towards Active Opposition.
Background. In 1928, farmers hit hard by famine and crop
failure organized a civil disobedience campaign and refused
to pay taxes that had been raised 30% during the crisis. After
several months, the local government relented and eliminated
the increase. The movement established Vallabhbhai Patel (Card
58) as a key figure in the national independence movement.
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Muslim Leauge. Per 8.8.3, only select States in Muslim
spaces: Jammu & Kashmir or any Muslim States in a Muslim
space.
47. Lala Lajpat Rai Killed During Protest
Rev Mus Con Raj
Local police clear crowds with lathi charge: Remove 1 Guerrilla, 1 Activist, 1 Protest marker, or 1 Unrest marker from each
of up to 2 spaces with cubes.
Murder of Sikh independence leader: In spaces with Underground Guerrillas, remove 3 pieces total or replace 2 with
Guerrillas or Activists (max 1 Base, not Gandhi).
Background. Lala Lajpat Rai had been fighting for independence since joining Congress in 1907. In 1928, he led a nonviolent demonstration in protest of the Simon Commission (Card
4), and was severely injured by Raj police and later died of his
wounds. To avenge his death, Bhagat Singh (Card 21) planned to
assassinate police superintendent James Scott, but killed police
officer John Saunders instead by mistake.
48. Harijan Campaign to End Untouchability
Rev Mus Raj Con
Gandhi pushes too far: Shift up to 3 spaces without Congress
Activists each 1 level towards Neutral.
We must remove untouchability from our hearts’: In 2 spaces
with pieces of more than 1 Faction, either place an Unrest marker
or shift 1 level towards Passive Opposition.
Background. Meaning ‘children of God,’ harijan was a term
coined by Gandhi to refer to untouchables, non-caste Indians at
the very bottom of society. Such a move was controversial at the
time. Ambedkar (Card 63) felt that the name change obscured
the suffering that untouchables regularly endured and preferred
the term dalit. Today, the term harijan is considered offensive.
41
© 2019 GMT Games, LLC
Gandhi ~ Playbook
49. Independence Day Defiantly Declared
Raj Con Mus Rev
An empty gesture: In up to 2 spaces, remove 1 Protest or 1 Unrest
marker, then in each selected space may pay 2 Resources to shift
1 level towards Active Support (NP Raj: free shift).
26 January, 1930: Remove up to 3 Protest markers. For each
marker removed, shift that space 1 level towards Active Opposition.
Background. After Congress passed a resolution at the end
of 1929 calling for the total independence of India from Great
Britain, Congress organized an independence day celebration for
January, 1930. Although mostly symbolic, the act foreshadowed
the important events of 1930 including the Salt March (Card
55) and Dharasana Raid (Card 12).
50. RSS Paramilitaries
Raj Con Rev Mus
Hindu extremists threaten more violence: Move up to 4 cubes,
Activists, and/or Guerrillas total belonging to 2 Factions from
the map to Out of Play (at least 1 piece from each Faction).
Nationalism, not communalism: Move up to 4 pieces total
belonging to 2 Factions from Out of Play to Available.
Background. The Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh, or National
Volunteer Organization, was formed in 1925. An extremist,
right-wing movement, the RSS sought to extend the power of
the Hindu majority in India, saw Muslim demands for representation and partition as a direct threat, and criticized Congress
as a weak British puppet. A RSS member, Nathuram Godse,
murdered Gandhi in 1948.
51. Britain Maintains the Salt Tax
Raj Mus Con Rev
‘Our absolute control of it is a control on the pulse of India’:
Arrest all Activists on Railways then Raj Resources +2 for each
Railway without a Strike marker.
‘The King’s writ no longer runs in India’: Place up to 3 Activists or Guerrillas on any Railways, then shift Restraint –2.
Background. In a tropical country
without refrigeration, salt was essential
for preserving food and the British understood this well. Salt had been at the
heart of Indian resistance to British rule
from the early days of Congress in the
1880s, and continued to be an important
issue in the 20th century. Gandhi’s most
famous act of civil disobedience, The
Salt March (Card 55), deftly challenged this potent tool of British control.
52. Provincial Elections Cool Tensions
Raj Mus Rev Con
Communal backlash against Congress gains: Shift up to 2
spaces with Congress Activists each 1 level towards Active
Support. Congress Ineligible through next card.
Election proves Nehru’s popularity: Shift 2 spaces with Congress pieces each 1 level towards Active Opposition, then place
1 Activist or Guerrilla in each space.
Background. Elections for provincial government posts were
held in eleven provinces in 1937, as promised by the 1935 Government of India Act (Card 29). Congress gained power in eight
provinces, but the Muslim League did poorly. Regional parties
in Sind, Bengal, and Punjab did better than either Congress or
the Muslim League, proving that the communal split within
Indian politics remained strong.
53. Rent Strike in the United Provinces
Raj Rev Con Mus
Failure: Move up to 2 cubes, Activists, or Guerrillas from the
map to Out of Play. Active Faction remains eligible.
Success: Move up to 3 pieces from Out of Play to any spaces
(no Troops to States). Raj ineligible through next card.
Background. Withholding the often heavy taxes due British
landlords was a common act of civil disobedience across India,
more often a reaction to local economic conditions than a direct
display of support for the national independence movement.
54. Hyderabad Defends its Independence
Raj Rev Mus Con
Princely states support Raj rule: Add up to 6 Sepoys to up to 3
States, then in each State remove 1 Guerrilla for every cube there.
Princely states defend their sovereignty: In each of up to 3
Princely States, remove all but 1 Sepoy or shift that space 1
level towards Active Opposition.
Background. After India gained its independence, it was expected that each princely state would in turn join the new nation
as their former leaders renounced their power and privileges.
One notable exception was the large state of Hyderabad. Indian
troops invaded Hyderabad in 1948, resulting in the conquest and
annexation of the state and the deaths of tens (perhaps hundreds)
of thousands.
42 Gandhi ~ Playbook
© 2019 GMT Games, LLC
55. The Salt March
Con Raj Mus Rev
‘It’s going to take a great deal more than a pinch of salt to
bring down the British Empire’: In the space with Gandhi,
remove any Protest marker and arrest all Activists there. Shift
that space 1 level towards Active Support.
‘The function of a civil resistance is to provoke a response’:
Place Protest markers in any 2 adjacent spaces. Unless in Jail,
move Gandhi to 1 of the selected spaces and add 2 Activists
there.
Background. Gandhi’s most famous act
of civil disobedience exemplified the
sophisticated techniques of nonviolent
resistance that he had been practising
for 35 years. He first wrote to Viceroy
Lord Irwin and detailed the planned
march; if Lord Irwin would discuss
changing the salt laws, Gandhi offered,
he would postpone the march. Predictably, the letter was ignored. Gandhi
planned the route carefully so that it
would take roughly three weeks to walk the 240 miles to the
ocean. He left his ashram with 80 followers and arrived with
50,000. The act of civil disobedience itself, gathering salt that
had collected in shallow pools along the water’s edge, was so
simple that anyone could participate. Moreover, salt was important to every Indian: it cut across ethnic and religious divisions.
To defy the British by collecting salt was both highly symbolic,
but also very practical.
56. Telangana Peasant Rebellion
Con Raj Rev Mus
Peasants brutally crushed: In up to 3 Princely States, remove
any Unrest or Protest markers and shift each 1 level towards
Active Support.
Communism spreads across Hyderabad: Shift any 3 Princely
States each 1 level towards Active Opposition.
Background. Hyderabad was one of the largest and most independent of the princely states, unwilling at first to join the
new Indian nation (Card 54). A peasant uprising in 1946 was
met with brutality as the Nizam employed his private army, the
razakars, to crush the communist uprising. The razakars themselves were soon defeated when the new Indian Army invaded
in 1948 (Card 54).
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Muslim League. Per 8.8.3, only select Princely States
other than Jammu & Kashmir if it would reduce Support and
Raj is a player Faction.
57. Sarojini Naidu Inspires the Masses
Con Mus Raj Rev
British jails fill with prisoners: Move up to 2 Activists from the
map to Out of Play, then move up to 2 cubes or Guerrillas from
Out of Play to any spaces (no Troops to States).
The Nightingale of India: Add up to 4 Activists to Protest spaces
(up to 2 from Out of Play).
Background. Called the Nightingale of
India, Sarojini Naidu was a devoted
student of Gandhi and a noted poet. She
walked with Gandhi during The Salt
March (Card 55) and, after Gandhi had
been arrested, led the Dharasana raid
(Card 12). She died not long after independence, in 1949.
58. Vallabhbhai Patel Agitates in Gujarat
Con Mus Rev Raj
Patel’s actions distract the movement: In States up to Restraint,
remove 1 Activist, place 1 Guerrilla, or shift the space to Neutral.
Nonviolence in Gujarat inspires others: In up to 3 spaces,
replace 1 Guerilla or 1 Sepoy with 1 Activist from Available.
Background. Though he was raised in nearby Telangana, Patel
became associated with Gandhi’s home state of Gujarat because
of his critical leadership during the successful nonviolent movement of 1928 (Card 46). Patel became one of Gandhi’s most
trusted lieutenants, and ultimately played several important roles
in the government of India after independence.
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Revolutionaries. Place Guerrilla before removing
Activists.
59. Khadi Spinning Wheels
Con Rev Raj Mus
British cloth imports remain strong: Raj Resources +3 for each
Railway with neither Strike nor Activists. Shift Restraint –1.
Homespun becomes a symbol of resistance: Raj Resources –3 for
each Railway with an Activist and/or Strike. Shift Restraint +1.
Background. When he was not marching, Gandhi focused on
constructive programme, his decades long effort to help India’s
villages break their dependence on Western goods. He quickly
recognized the absurdity of exporting Indian cotton to Britain
simply to import British cloth. Gandhi popularized making and
wearing homespun as a way of resisting British rule, an act of
non-cooperation that was practical as well as symbolic.
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Raj. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for NP Raj.
T NP Congress. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for NP
Congress.
T NP Muslim League. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for
NP Muslim League.
T NP Revolutionaries. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for
NP Revolutionaries.
43
© 2019 GMT Games, LLC
Gandhi ~ Playbook
60. Gandhi’s Young India Newspaper
Con Rev Mus Raj
Indian free press restricted by the British: Remove all Activists
and Guerrillas on Railways to Available.
Gandhi’s writings spur action: Add 1 Active Activist or Underground Guerrilla to up to 4 Railways that are adjacent to
Opposition spaces.
Background. Well aware of the power of the press to publicize
his message of nonviolence and promote resistance to British
rule, Gandhi published the weekly newspaper Young India from
1919 to 1931.
61. Simla Conference Divides India
Mus Raj Con Rev
Britain exploits communal divisions: Shift up to 2 Muslim
Provinces each 1 level towards Passive Support. For each selected space, shift Unity –1.
Two state plan hesitantly embraced: Set Unity to 3 and add up
to 2 Bases to any Provinces with no Raj Control.
Background. Soon after the end of WWII, the Simla Conference
was held in India to discuss the end of British occupation. The
issue of partition dominated the discussions and ultimately the
conference stalled without a clear timeline for independence.
Non-player Event Instructions.
T NP Congress. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for NP
Congress.
62. Great Bengal Famine
Mus Rev Con Raj
Government prioritizes famine relief: Set East Bengal and 1
adjacent space to Passive Support.
Gandhi denounces policy of denial: In 2 spaces with Raj
Control, either set each space to Passive Opposition or add 1
Unrest marker to each.
Background. One of the terrible tragedies of the 20th century,
three million people were killed by the famine and spread of
disease from 1943-1944. The causes of the disaster remaining
controversial to this day. Many blame British wartime policies,
such as those meant to deny Japanese forces in Burma access
to resources, while others blame population growth and crop
failure due to natural disasters in 1942-43.
63. Ambedkar Advocates for Untouchables
Mus Con Raj Rev
British exploit caste divisions: Shift up to 3 spaces each 1 level
towards Passive Opposition. For each shift, Raj Resources +3.
Political and social independence: Move up to 3 Activists or
Guerrillas from Out of Play to Available. Executing Faction
remains Eligible.
Background. B.R. Ambedkar was a lawyer and outspoken critic
who actively sought to expand rights for Untouchables. He made
the Poona Pact with Gandhi in 1932 (Card 64) that guaranteed
representation for Depressed Classes. After independence, he
became the leader of the Dalit Movement, which saw half a million Untouchables convert with Ambedkar to Buddhism rather
than continue to live as non-caste Hindus.
64. Communal Award Solidifies Caste
Mus Con Rev Raj
Electorate for Depressed Classes established: Replace up to 3
Congress Activists with Sepoys, Muslim League Activists, or
Guerrillas. Shift Unity –1.
Gandhi’s epic fast leads to compromise: Shift up to 3 spaces
with Protest markers each 1 level towards Active Opposition,
then remove the Protest markers.
Background. The Second Round Table Conference (Card 27)
established separate electorates for different religious and caste
groups in India. Gandhi objected to the legal separation of Untouchables and undertook his Epic Fast, which lasted six days.
The hunger strike ended when Gandhi and B.R. Ambedkar (Card
63) agreed in the Poona Pact that Depressed Classes would be
granted guaranteed seats in the Indian legislature, but would not
constitute a separate electorate.
65. United Bengal
Mus Rev Raj Con
East-West split divides Muslim India: Either Remove 1 Muslim
State, or arrest all Activists in up to 2 States.
Bengali nationalism: Place a Muslim State in 1 Province with
no Raj Control (Troops there to any Cities), or place Protest
markers in any 3 States.
Background. Bengal was first partitioned by the British in 1905 into a
Muslim-majority East and a Hindumajority West. The move was very unpopular and sparked a Bengali nationalist movement that shocked the government. Although partition was reversed
in 1911, the religious fault line running
through Bengal would reappear in 1947,
when British India was partitioned into
Hindu India and Muslim Pakistan,
which included East Bengal, (but not Calcutta). East Bengal
would later gains its independence from Pakistan in 1971-72,
becoming Bangladesh.
66. Gandhi’s Fast Unto Death
Mus Rev Con Raj
Gandhi alone cannot end communal violence: Add 1 Unrest
marker to up to 2 spaces with both Congress and Muslim League
Activists. Shift Unity –1.
Gandhi’s fast halts communal rioting: Replace up to 3 Guerrillas with Activists. Shift Restraint +1.
Background. The end of British rule and the subsequent partitioning of India into Hindu and Muslim nations led to violence
and bloodshed on a staggering level. Throughout India, communities that had been integrated for a thousand years were ripped
apart. Calcutta, the site of communal bloodshed in 1946 (Card
72), was in the midst of rioting in 1947 when Gandhi undertook
a four day fast that halted the violence.
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Raj. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for NP Raj.
44 Gandhi ~ Playbook
© 2019 GMT Games, LLC
67. Land Reform Demanded
Rev Raj Con Mus
Indian aristocracy support the Raj: Shift up to 3 States each
1 level towards Active Support, then remove 1 Muslim State.
Large estates broken up: Shift up to 3 States each 1 level
towards Active Opposition. Remove up to 4 Sepoys total from
the selected spaces.
Background. The British relied on the centuries old zamindari
system to maintain its rule in northern India. Zamindars were
aristocratic landlords who had collected taxes for the Mughal
emperors of the 18th century, and continued the practice in the
Raj era. Many landlords exploited the peasants who worked their
land, sometimes leading to rent strikes (Card 53).
68. Red Fort Trials
Rev Raj Mus Con
Traitors exposed: Remove up to a die roll of Guerrillas from
any spaces, then shift Restraint –2.
Vindication: Shift Restraint +2, then subtract twice Restraint
from Raj Resources.
Background. In 1945-46, prominent leaders of the Indian
National Army (Card 69) were tried in courts-martial for waging war against Great Britain during WWII. The coming end of
British rule in India and fears over widespread mutinies in the
British Indian military led to light sentences.\
Non-player Instructions.
T NP Revolutionaries. This Event is not effective (8.8.3) for
NP Revolutionaries.
69. Indian National Army
Rev Con Raj Mus
Threat of Japanese invasion unites Indians: Add up to 3 cubes
or Activists total (from either Available or Out of Play) to East
Bengal or adjacent spaces.
INA diverts British attention: Either flip all Guerrillas in India
Underground or add up to 4 Guerrillas to Muslim spaces.
Background. The Indian National Army
was first formed in 1942 in southeast
Asia from British Indian Army (Card 1)
soldiers who had been captured by
Japanese forces, but disbanded soon
afterwards. Reformed in 1943 by Subhas
Chandra Bose (Card 22), the INA was
engaged in action against Allied forces
in Burma in 1944-45. After the war, the
trials of INA members (Card 68) highlighted the precarious nature of British
rule in the final years of the Raj.
70. All India Forward Bloc
Rev Con Mus Raj
Subhas Chandra Bose exiled from India: Move any 2 cubes,
Activists, and/or Guerrillas to Out of Play. Revolutionaries
Resources –3.
Bose rallies anti-British forces: In up to 3 spaces, add 1 Guerrilla or Activist from Out of Play.
Background. The All India Forward Bloc was a left-wing group
that formed when Subhas Chandra Bose (Card 22) was ousted
from the Presidency of Congress in 1939. When he called for
violent revolution to end British rule, Bose was arrested and the
Forward Bloc became a minor party. After WWII, it was rebuilt
as a socialist political party, active to this day.
71. Nankana Massacre Stuns India
Rev Mus Con Raj
Attack exposes British complacency: Add 1 Unrest marker to
Punjab and any 1 adjacent space without Troops.
Gandhi expresses his anguish and grief: Move Gandhi to
Punjab (release from Jail if necessary) and shift Punjab 2 levels
towards Active Opposition.
Background. In 1921 during the Akali Movement (Card 35),
Sikh protesters occupied the Nankana Sahib gurdwara in Punjab.
The mahant in charge of the gurdwara ordered hired mercenaries to storm the gurdwara and slaughter those inside. 86 were
murdered. Local police restored order, and the mahant was
turned over the local authorities.
72. Direct Action Day
Rev Mus Raj Con
British troops restore order: In up to 3 spaces with Activists,
remove any Active Guerrillas. Revolutionaries Resources +1
for each Guerrilla removed.
Great Calcutta Killings: In up to 4 spaces with Underground
Guerrillas, add 1 Guerrilla or, if no Raj Control, 1 Unrest marker.
Background. In 1946, the Muslim League called for a Direct
Action Day to protest the formation of an interim government
without League approval. Hindu-Muslim tensions were already
high across India. They erupted into violence in Calcutta. Over
several days of rioting, 4,000 were killed. The split between
Hindu India and Muslim India was irreparable, partition was
inevitable.
Viceroy Campaign Cards:
PLAY NOTE: For simplicity and consistency, I have opted to
use the less formal address “Lord-so-and-so” when referring
to each Viceroy and Governor-General of India.
73. British Viceroy Lord Chelmsford
The Authoritarian: Assault costs 1 Resource for each space
where Sepoys Assault.
Non-player Raj effect: The Activation Number during Assault
is 1.
Background. Frederic John Napier Thesiger, Lord Chelmsford,
served as Governor of Queensland and New South Wales in
Australia before being appointed as Viceroy of India in 1916.
During his term, he moved towards self-government with the
Montagu-Chelmsford reforms, but also expanded British power
through the Rowlatt Act to curb the growing nationalist movement. The massacre at Jallianwala Bagh in 1919, and subsequent
events during the Non-Cooperation Campaign that followed,
marred the final years of his service which ended in 1921.
45
© 2019 GMT Games, LLC
Gandhi ~ Playbook
74. British Viceroy Lord Reading
The Imperialist: The first space selected for Raj Operations
is free.
Non-player Raj effect: No effect.
Background. Rufus Daniel Isaacs, Earl of Reading, had been
Lord Chief Justice of England, a post he resigned in order to
become Viceroy. Succeeding Lord Chelmsford in 1921, he
attempted reconciliation with nationalist leaders, met with
Gandhi, and made a personal visit to Amritsar, the site of the
Jallianwala Bagh massacre. He also had Gandhi arrested in 1922
for sedition, for which he was sentenced to six years hard labor.
Reading’s term ended in 1926, during a momentary lull in the
independence movement.
75. British Viceroy Lord Irwin
The Compromiser: Sweep costs 1 Resource for each space
where Sepoys Sweep.
Non-player Raj effect: The Activation Number during Sweep
is 1.
Background. After a brief interlude,
Lord Reading was succeeded by Edward
Frederick Lindley Wood, Baron Irwin,
in 1926. He was one of the most important British politicians of his era, serving
in a number of key positions including
Leader of the House of Lords, Lord
President of the Council, and Lord Privy
Seal. His term in India saw several significant moments of the independence
movement, including the Simon Commission Report, the Salt March, the Declaration of Independence, the First Round Table Conference, and the Gandhi-Irwin
Pact. When he left office in 1931, the tenor of the conflict had
changed irrevocably.
76. British Viceroy Lord Willingdon
The Bureaucrat: Deploy costs 1 Resource for each space where
Sepoys Deploy.
Non-player Raj effect: The Activation Number during Deploy
is 1.
Background. Major Freeman Freeman-Thomas, Earl of
Willingdon, succeeded Lord Irwin in 1931. He had already
served in India, having been the Governor of Bombay and
Madras before leaving India temporarily to serve as Governor
General of Canada. At the start of his term, the Second Round
Table Conference seemed to point towards good relations
between the British government and Indian leaders, but that
soon fell apart. In 1933, Willingdon outlawed Congress and
had Gandhi and 80,000 activists arrested. He left office in 1936.
77. British Viceroy Lord Linlithgow
The Defender: Martial Law does not place an Unrest marker.
Non-player Raj effect: May select spaces without Unrest for
Martial Law.
Background. Victor Alexander John
Hope, 2nd Marquess of Linlithgow, succeeded Willingdon in 1936, after turning
down offers to be Governor of Madras
and the Governor General of Australia.
Serving the longest the term of the
seven Viceroys featured in Gandhi,
Linlithgow presided over the provincial
elections promised by the 1935 Government of India Act, and was in office
when the Second World War started.
Seeking Indians’ full support of the British war effort, in 1940
he issued the August Offer that promised a greater role for Indians in the Raj government. This was followed up in 1942 by
the Cripps Mission, which promised Dominion Status in exchange for support in the war. For many in Congress, this was
too little, too late, and the massive civil disobedience campaign
of the Quit India Movement soon followed.
78. British Viceroy Lord Wavell
The General: Free Sweep into one space selected for Assault.
Non-player Raj effect: NP Raj will first Sweep into one space
using the Sweep column of the Space Selection Priorities table
(8.4.1), then select that space for Assault (8.6.3).
Background. Field Marshal Archibald Percival Wavell, 1st
Earl Wavell, succeeded Linlithgow when the former Viceroy
retired in 1943. A decorated veteran of the Second Boer War and
World War I, Wavell had served in the Middle East at the start
of World War II before being sent to India as Viceroy. He came
in the midst of the Quit India Movement, which had subsided
by 1944 with most Congress leaders, including Gandhi, under
arrest. After the war, he was unable to quell communal violence
that erupted as the British prepared to leave, and was replaced
by Lord Mountbatten in 1947.
79. British Viceroy Lord Mountbatten
The Negotiator: Imperialism costs 2 Resources per marker or
shift (during Govern or the Support Phase of the next Campaign
Round).
Non-player Raj effect: No effect.
Background. Louis Francis Albert Victor Nicholas Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma, was the last British
Viceroy of India, serving less than a year in 1947. He oversaw
the withdrawal of British forces, the partitioning of India, and
the creation of the states of India and Pakistan at midnight on
14-15 August, 1947.